Published inthe DOF on February 20, 1985 last reform posted in DOF on March 26, 2014 chapter I of the Disponentes article 10.-under the terms of Act and this regulation, the disponentes can be original and secondary.
 
Article 11.-is disponenteoriginario the person with respect to his own body and the products out.
 
Article 12.-the disponenteoriginario may at any time revoke your consent to hayaotorgado for purposes of disposal of their organs, tissues, products or entitled corpse, without any responsibility on their part.
 
Where originating eldisponente has not revoked its consent in life, will not be valid revocation which, where appropriate, make the disponentes side to which refers the following article.
 
Article 13.-will be disponentessecundarios, according to the following order of preference, the following: I.-the spouse, elconcubinario, concubine, ascendants, descendants and the parientescolaterales up to the second degree of the disponent originating;
 
II.-State sanitariacompetente;
 
III. the Public Ministry, in relation to the organs, tissues and carcasses of human beings that seencuentren under his responsibility on the occasion of the exercise of their functions;
 
IV.-the judicial authority;
 
V. the representanteslegales of minors and incapable, only in relation to the available decadaveres;
 
VI.-the institucioneseducativas with regard to the organs, tissues and bodies to them seanproporcionados for research or teaching, once you expire in run dereclamacion while this was effected, and VII.-in addition to quieneslas General provisions confer such character, conditions and requirements that are designated therein.
 
Article 14.-the disponentessecundarios referred to in the preceding article, may grant suconsentimiento for the disposal of the body's organs and tissues, thus còmode products of the disponent originating, in terms of law and esteReglamento.
 
According to lapropia law, in cases in which the competent authority order necropsy nose will require authorization or any consent to the provision of organosy fabrics, and should be subject to technical standards that are issued.
 
Article 15.-the preference disponentes side entrelos referred to in section I of article 13, sedefinira in accordance with the rules of kinship that sets the code Civil parael Federal District in common matters and for the Republic as a whole in materiafederal.
 
Article 16.-the case you detrasplantes inter vivos, originally from which organs ytejidos be taken continuosly must: I.-have more than dieciochoanos of age and less than 60;
 
II.-having updated and Pro dictamenmedico on his State of health, including the aspectopsiquiatrico;
 
III. have compatibilidadcon the receiver in accordance with medical tests taken;
 
IV. have complete recibidoinformacion about the risks of the operation and the consequences Dela removal of the body, in his case, as well as the probabilities of exitopara receiver, and Villazón have expressed suvoluntad in writing, free of physical or moral coercion given to suitable dostestigos or before a notary.
 
Trying to be you detrasplantes of bone marrow, the Secretary may, where appropriate, exempt aldisponente from the requirement referred to in section I of estearticulo. Effect studies therapeutic ydiagnosticos is determined must be submitted to the Secretariat and, where appropriate, the legal representatives of the disponent elconsentimiento, who also shall provide the information referred to in section IV ofis article.
 
FIRST section of the organs available for purposes therapeutic article 21.-the yTejidos available ofbodies and tissues for therapeutic purposes shall be free of charge.
 
Article 22.-prohibited the Commerce organs or tissues detached or ablated by surgery, accident or wrongful.
 
Article 23.-transplantation only oforgan non-regenerable, essential to the preservation of life, solopodra be getting it from a corpse. For the purposes of this regulation, eyes will be considered as a single body.
 
Article 24.-the document in the original disponent thatthe expresses his will for the disposition of their tissues for transplantation purposes, organosy shall contain: I.-name complete original deldisponente;
 
II. place of residence;
 
III. age;
 
IV.-sex;
 
V marital status;
 
VI.-occupation;
 
VII. name and domicile delconyuge, concubine or boyfriend, if any;
 
VIII.-If single, name and domicile of the parents and in the absence of these, one of the closest susfamiliares;
 
IX.-the case itself will and gratuitously signaling, consent to the disposition of the fabric organoo that question, expressing themselves if this provision refers to living hechaentre or after his death;
 
X-clear identification of organ or tissue transplantation object yprecisa;
 
XI.-the name of the receptordel organ or tissue, in the case of transplants between living, or conditions that enable the identification to the receiver if the provision was paradespues of his death;
 
XII.-the signs received dehaber information to your satisfaction about the consequences of laextirpacion of the organ or tissue;
 
XIII.-name, signature ydomicilio of witnesses in the case of private document;
 
XIV.-place and date on which issues, and XV-signature or fingerprint disponent digitaldel.
 
Article 25.-unorgano or tissue receptor should meet the following requirements: I.-have a padecimientoque can be dealt with effectively by means of transplantation;
 
II.-not present otrasenfermedades that predictably will interfere with the success of transplantation;
 
III. have a State health mental and physical able to tolerate transplantation and its evolution;
 
IV. having expressed suvoluntad in writing, once aware of the object of intervention, susriesgos and the odds of success, and Villazón be compatible with eldisponente native who will be taking the organ or tissue.
 
(Repealing ultimoparrafo)
 
Article 26.-the writing where seexprese the will referred to in the section IV of the preceding article, shall contain: I.-name complete delreceptor;
 
II. place of residence;
 
III. age;
 
IV.-sex;
 
V marital status;
 
VI.-occupation;
 
VII. name and domicile delconyuge, concubine or boyfriend, if any;
 
VIII.-If single, name and domicile of the parents and in the absence of these, one of the closest susfamiliares;
 
IX.-the senalamientopreciso that voluntarily agree to deltrasplante preparation, and that was sufficiently aware of the object and class laintervencion and the chances of treatment success;
 
X signature or fingerprint receiver digitaldel;
 
XI. place and date on which emits, and XII. name, signature ydomicilio of witnesses if it is private document.
 
Article 27.-when due deminoridad, incapacity or physical impossibility of the receiver, this not puedaexpresar their will to carry out the transplantation, the intervention may be consented to by the persons referred to in section I of article 13de this regulation, or by the legal representatives of minors or unable to, provided they have previously received complete information on lasprobabilidades of therapeutic success. 
 
The authorization to which mentioned in previous paragraph, must meet the requirements that apply article 26, as well as the point of the link with the receiver.
 
If urgenciapara the realization of the transplant, consent may be given by the first person mentioned in section I of article 13 of esteReglamento that is present and, failing this by the internal Committee deTrasplantes of the institution concerned.
 
Article 28.-in case you detrasplantes of organs or tissues obtained from a corpse, this meet following conditions precedent to the death: I.-have had edadfisiologica useful for purposes of transplantation;
 
II.-not having suffered a prolonged agony deleterious iteffect;
 
III. not have malignant padecidotumores with risk of metastasis to the organ used, and IV-not have serious presentadoinfecciones and other conditions that may, medical judgment, receiver afectaral or compromising the success of the transplant.
 
Article 29.-obtaining, guardian, conservation, preparation and use of organs, tissues, their components and products of living human beings or corpses for therapeutic purposes, scientific research or teaching, it can only be done on institucionesautorizadas for this.
 
Article 30.-the banks of organs, tissues and its components may be: I.-eyes;
 
II. livers;
 
III.-pituitary gland;
 
IV.-bone and cartilage;
 
V bone marrow;
 
VI.-Pancreas;
 
VII.-parathyroid;
 
VIII.-leather;
 
IX.-kidneys;
 
X blood and suscomponentes;
 
XI. Plasma;
 
XII.-vessels, and XIII.-other than autoricela Secretariat.
 
Banks may be one or several kinds of organs or tissues referred to in the fraccionesanteriores, and should be expressed in the corresponding documentation type debanco concerned.
 
Article 31.-responsible for giving them banks of organ and tissue transplantation procedures facilitate yal effect will develop the following functions: I.-participate in yourselection of disponentes originating;
 
II. obtaining and keeps ofbodies and tissues;
 
III. preservation yalmacenamiento;
 
IV.-distribution, and V-other similar forewing to be determined by the Secretariat.
 
Also podrandesarrollar the activities of scientific research and teaching in lorelativo their duties, as well as training of supersonal.
 
Article 32.-woven organosy banks should work in coordination with one or more establecimientosde health of the public, social and private sectors.
 
Article 33.-the requirements service, organization, operation and sanitary engineering of the banks ofbodies and fabrics, will be fixed by the Secretariat through technical standards instructional ypor or circular, which will be published in the Gaceta Sanitaria.
 
Article 34.-institutions querealicen transplants must have an internal Committee of transplantation, cuyasatribuciones shall be as follows: I.-Verify that lostrasplantes are carried out in accordance with the requirements established Act, this regulation and technical standards;
 
II.-Verify that the trasplantesse made with maximum security and according to principles of medical ethics;
 
III. make the originating dedisponentes selection and receivers for transplantation;
 
IV. provide the informacionnecesaria receptors, disponentes and family in relation to therapeutic estosprocedimientos, and v.-promote theupgrade of personnel involved in carrying out transplants.
 
The committees which family this article, they will be integrated with specialized medical staff matters of transplants and in an interdisciplinary manner, under the responsibility of the institution, and their integration must be approved by the Secretariat.
 
Article 35.-when by virtue make them advances in transplantation science is useless or is not in the case of article 321 of the law; the Secretariat may declare it so to publish esaresolucion in the Gaceta Sanitaria, banks of organs and tissues and sufficient hospital shall refrain from performing common with transplantation matter of resolution.
 
Article 36.-the secretariat will have asu office national transplant and transfusion records, cuyasfunciones will be: I.-coordinate distribution of organs and tissues throughout the national territory;
 
II. establish and implement procedimientospara facilitate, throughout the national territory, the obtaining of organs ytejidos of human beings;
 
III. keep records originating from organs and tissues and disponentes human blood dedisponentes;
 
IV.-study, know yproporcionar information of all aspects related to the disposicionde, organs and tissues of human beings;
 
V send banks bleeding, plasma banks and transfusion services, control samples here referred to in article 44 of this regulation, and VI-the other similar forewings which designate the Secretariat.
 
Article 37.-the establecimientosque carried out acts of disposition of organs and tissues for therapeutic purposes, shall render a report of its activities to the national registers deTrasplantes and transfusion, referred to in the previous article, in terms, form and periodicity that designate the Secretariat.
 
SECTION four of the disposal of corpses article 58.-the Secretariat shall adopt technical rules relating to the conditions for the management, use, conservation and disposal of corpses.
 
Article 59.-disposal decadaveres for research or teaching purposes only may be made upon certification of the loss of life in accordance with the requirements of article 317 of the Act.
 
Article 60.-the provision decadaveres of unknown persons, shall be subject to what point the Ministeriopublico, in accordance with the applicable legal provisions, esteReglamento and technical standards which give the Secretariat.
 
Article 61.-being decadaveres of known persons in which the public prosecutor or judicial authority have commanded the practice of necropsy, his utilizacioncon for purposes of research or teaching will take place in accordance with upon by this regulation and the relevant technical standards; If theUse is for transplant purposes, you will be in addition to the provisions of article 325 of the Act and application will be required in writing by the institution obanco of organs and tissues interested as well as inform the autoridadsanitaria.
 
Article 62.-to carry out any act of disposal of carcasses, must have previously with certificate of death, which will be issued once checked the fallecimientoy determined its causes, by medical professionals or personasautorizadas by the competent health authority.
 
Article 63.-the burial of corpses oincineracion can only be performed with the authorization delencargado or judge of the Civil Register corresponding, who will ensure is delfallecimiento and its causes, and will require the presentation of the certificate dedefuncion.
 
Article 64.-the case of chelae corpses will remain without reburial is or incinerated, by more designated tiempodel in article 339 of the Act, shall be kept in accordance with the procedures referred to in the following article.
 
Article 65.-is consideranprocedimientos accepted for the preservation of corpses.
 
I. the cooling encamaras closed at temperatures below zero degrees centigrade;
 
II.-embalming, by intravascular injection of antiseptic solutions;
 
III. the total immersion decadaver in sealed containers containing antiseptic solutions, and IV-the other quedetermine the Secretariat, taking into account scientific advances on lamateria.
 
Article 66.-the sanitariode cemeteries control will be carried out by the competent health authorities, conformity with the applicable legal provisions and standards tecnicasque correspond to issue to the Secretariat.
 
Article 67.-corpses seaninhumanos must remain in the pit, as a minimum: I.-six years of people older than 15 years of age at the time of his death, and II.-five years those of people under fifteen years of age at the time of his death.
 
After losanteriores deadlines, the remains will be considered as arid.
 
Article 68.-vouchers deembalsamiento must conform to the models issued by the Secretariat, mismosque will be published in the Gaceta Sanitaria.
 
Article 69.-decadaveres transfer by air, land or sea, will be compartimientosaislados than for passengers and goods, and in accordance with technical standards issued by the Secretariat.
 
Article 70.-for the practical denecropsias required: I.-order of the Ministeriopublico, the judicial authority or the health authority;
 
II.-sourced deldisponente authorization, or III.-authorization of side losdisponentes in the order of preference established in TheLight, when the necropsy intends to be in institucionescientificas u hospital and provided that there is no provision in originating disponent contrariodel.
 
Article 71.-only may aplicartecnicas and procedures for the preservation of corpses: I.-doctors with titulolegalmente issued and registered by the competent educational authorities: II.-the technical oauxiliares in embalming having diplomas legally issued yregistrados by the competent educational authorities, and III-the other personasexpresamente authorized by the Secretariat.
 
Article 72.-the establecimientosque to apply the techniques and procedures for the preservation of corpses, only may be those who have been expressly authorized them, according to their installed capacity and the respective health needs.
 
Article 73.-the disposicionesgenerales on corpses will be applied, where appropriate, of embryos yfetos.
 
Chapter VI of the revocation deAutorizaciones article 122.-the Secretary may revoke authorizations that in accordance with this regulation has been granted, inthe following cases: I.-when causassupervenientes, to check that the activities, products or services, constitute risk or damage to health;
 
II.-when the exercise Dela activity exceeds the limits specified in the authorization;
 
III. because a usodistinto be given to the authorization;
 
IV.-by incumplimientograve to the provisions of the Act, this regulation or other disposicionesaplicables;
 
V for reiteradarenuencia to comply with orders issued by the Secretariat in terms of law, of this regulation and other provisions;
 
VI. when falsoslos are data or documents provided by the applicant, which have servidode base to the Secretariat to grant the corresponding authorization;
 
VII. when the interesadono conforms to the terms, conditions or requirements under which it granted lehaya permission, or make improper use of it;
 
VIII.-when persons, transport, objects or products, no longer meet the conditions or requisitosbajo which granted them authorizations;
 
IX. at the request of elinteresado, and x.-in other cases quedetermine the Secretariat, under the terms of the Act and this regulation.
 
Article 123-when banks ofbodies, fabrics and components no longer provide in the form final services, will be no matter the authorizations granted and will cause larevocacion of them.
 
In these cases, sedebera notify the Secretariat within the ten days following wing date that will no longer serve in final form, attaching the respective authorizations. 
 
Article 124-when banks ofbodies, tissues and their components suspend temporarily its serviciosdeberan notify the Secretariat within five working days siguientesal that happens, informing the reasons for the suspension and duration.
 
The enhanced suspension desesenta calendar days shall be considered as final; However, Secretariat may grant one longer period where there are causes that, in sujuicio, justifies it.
 
The service resumption must be notified to the Secretariat, within the space of five following the same diashabiles.
 
Chapter IX of the SancionesAdministrativas article 130.-the violations of provisions of this regulation, they shall be punished administratively by the Secretariat, without prejudice to the penalties that apply when crimes seanconstitutivas. 
 
Article 131-the violation of provisions contained in articles 37, 44, 46, 51, 52, 55, 62, 83, 84,86, and 87 of this Regulation shall be punished in accordance with Article 419 Dela law.
 
Article 132.-violation of provisions contained in articles 16 fraction V, 34, 50, 63, 67, 70,72, 75, 76, 77 and 82, fraction I of this Regulation shall be punished in terms of article 420 of the law.
 
Article 133.-violation of provisions contained in the articles 9., 21, 22, 23, 29, 35 and 39 of esteReglamento shall be punished under the terms of article 421 of the law.
 
Article 134-offences noprevistas in this chapter shall be punished in accordance with article 422de the law. 
 
CHAPTER XII
