Document3\16/04/10Teladia  Page 1
April 2010
Code of Practice
for the use of
Human Stem Cell
Lines
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 2 of 45
Foreword 
This Code provides guidance on best practice for those working with stem cell lines 
and  specifies  oversight  mechanisms for  research  involving  human  embryonic  stem 
cell lines. It also sets out the requirements for the activities of the UK Stem Cell Bank
in  relation to  procuring, storing  and distributing  human  stem cell lines  in  order to 
support  research that  will help improve understanding  of  human  development and 
disease and aid the generation of strategies to treat serious disease. 
The UK  Stem  Cell Bank was  established in  2003 in  response to  Government
recommendations to facilitate the sharing and use of quality controlled human stem 
cell lines by  the clinical and  research  communities.  The Bank is  overseen  by  an 
independent Steering Committee (the Steering Committee for the UK Stem Cell Bank
and for the Use of Stem Cell Lines – hereafter called the Steering Committee), which 
has developed this Code of Practice to explain the role of the Steering Committee and
to provide guidance and assistance on best practice to those working with stem cell
lines. 
In the UK, research  involving  human  embryos,  including the generation  of  human 
embryonic stem cell lines, is under statutory control by the Human Fertilisation and 
Embryology Authority (HFEA). Embryonic stem  cell lines  once established are not 
embryos and the Government has passed legislation that establishes that  research 
involving such cell lines does not need the same level of regulation to which embryo 
research is subject to by the HFEA.  However, as the generation of embryonic stem 
cell lines  involves  the destruction  of  human  embryos, oversight  in  the form of  a
Steering Committee was  recommended to ensure that  research is conducted within 
an ethical framework that is transparent to the public and is in keeping  with HFEA
regulations.  The oversight  mechanisms governing  research  involving  established
human embryonic stem cell lines and this Code of Practice are voluntary.  However,  adherence is a HFEA licensing requirement in the UK and there is an expectation by 
Government that they are adhered to. In addition scientists have a desire for there to 
be ethical oversight  of  all work  involving human  embryonic  stem cells.  Other
pluripotent stem cell lines, whether fetal, adult or those generated through induced 
pluripotency,  are not  subject to the same  level of  oversight  by  the Steering 
Committee, although the ethical considerations in relation to their derivation and use
are covered within this Code of Practice. 
This  Code of  Practice should be regarded as  an evolving  document which  will be
revised and  updated in  line with  both  practice and  the requirements  arising  from
relevant UK and EU legislation such as the Human Tissue Act and the EU Tissue and 
Cells Directive. 
Comments on this document are welcomed and should be forwarded to:
stemcellsecretary@headoffice.mrc.ac.uk.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 3 of 45
Contents Page
1. Purpose of the Code of Practice 6
2. Definition of Stem Cells  6 
2.1  Stem cells  6 
2.1.1  Embryonic Stem Cells  6 
2.1.2  Embryonic Germ Cells  7 
2.1.3  Somatic Stem Cells  7 
2.1.4  Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells  8 
2.1.5  The relationship between embryonic stem cells and other stem cells  8 
2.2  Stem Cell Lines  8 
2.3  The relationship of the Code of Practice to different types of stem cell 9
3. Legislation governing the establishment and use of human stem
cell lines 
9 
3.1  The Human Tissue Act (2004)  9 
3.2  The European Union Tissue and Cells Directives  10
3.3  The Human Fertilisation and Embryology (HFE) Act (1990, 2001 and 
2008) 
10
3.4  Medicines for Human Use (Clinical trials) Regulations 2004  12
3.5  EC Regulation on Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products 2007 12
3.6  Clinical trials involving the use of human stem cell lines – the role of
the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee (GTAC) 
12
3.7  Overview of regulatory requirements  13
4. The UK Stem Cell Bank and its Principles of Operation  13
4.1  Ethical Principles  14
4.2  Quality Assurance 15
4.2.1  The UK Stem Cell Bank Quality Management System  15
4.2.2  Role of Staff and External Advisors  16
4.2.3  Facilities and Procedures  17
4.3  Operation of the Stem Cell Bank 17
4.3.1  Deposit of Stem Cell Lines  17
4.3.2  Banking of Stem Cell Lines  18
4.3.3  Qualification and Testing of Stem Cell Lines  18
4.3.4  Storage and Distribution of Stem Cell Lines  19
4.3.5  Recall and Disposal of Stem Cell Lines  19
4.3.6  Inventory of Stem Cell Lines  20
4.3.7  Assessment of Risk and Contingency Planning 20
4.3.8  Health and Safety 21
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 4 of 45
5. Governance of research involving established human embryonic 
stem cell lines 
21
5.1  Steering Committee for the UK Stem Cell Bank and for the Use of Stem 
Cell Lines 
21
5.2  UK Stem Cell Bank Management Committee 22
5.3  Audit  22
5.4  Annual Reports  22
5.5  Engagement with the Stem Cell Community and the Public  22
6. Deposit and Withdrawal of Stem Cell Lines  from the UK Stem
Cell Bank 
23
6.1  Depositing Stem Cell Lines in the UK Stem Cell Bank 24
6.2  Examples of stem cell lines that can be deposited in the UK Stem Cell
Bank
25
6.3  Curation Policy  25
6.4  Accessing Stem Cell Lines from the UK Stem Cell Bank 26
6.5  Clinical Grade Cell Lines for Research Purposes  27
6.6  Charges levied by the UK Stem Cell Bank 27
6.7  Liability 28
7. Accessing stem cell lines from the UK Stem Cell Bank and using 
human embryonic stem cell lines from sources other than the
UK Stem Cell Bank 
29
7.1  General principles  29
7.1.1  Research Projects in which human embryonic stem cell lines may be
used
29
7.1.2  Peer Review 29
7.1.3  Research Ethics Committee approval 29
7.2  Using human embryonic Stem Cell lines from sources other than the
UK Stem Cell Bank
30
7.2.1  UK Stem Cell Registry  30
7.3  Export of stem cell lines  31
8. Application Procedure 31
9. Donor Consent  32
9.1  Donor Consent for the use of embryos in research  32
9.2  Deriving stem cells from non­embryonic tissues  32
9.2.1  Fetal Tissue 32
9.2.2  Tissues used to create human admixed embryos  32
9.2.3  Tissues used to create induced pluripotent stem cells  34
10. Derivation and Use of Stem Cell Lines  35
10.1  Quality and safety standards in fundamental stem cell research  35
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 5 of 45
10.2  Regulation governing the derivation and processing of clinical grade
stem cell lines 
35
11. Intellectual property  36
11.1  Patentability of stem cells  36
11.2  Intellectual property generated by the UK Stem Cell Bank 37
12. Glossary of Terms  38
13. Full Website Links  44
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 6 of 45
1.  Purpose of the Code of Practice 
This Code was drawn up by the Steering Committee for the UK Stem Cell Bank
and for the Use of Stem Cell Lines and benefited from input by a wide range of 
stakeholders.  It provides guidance on best practice for those working with stem 
cell lines  and  specifies  oversight  mechanisms for  research involving  human 
embryonic stem cell lines. The Code should provide confidence and reassurance
to  professionals  and the public  alike that  stem  cell research  in  the UK  is 
performed  to  best  practice and is  conducted within  a transparent  and  ethical
framework.  The main emphasis of the Code is on human embryonic stem cell
lines. However,  references to stem cell lines derived from other human tissues 
are included as the UK Stem Cell Bank will curate and distribute human cell lines 
from all sources.  For ease of  reference text referring  specifically to  embryonic 
stem cells has been italicised. 
This Code also sets out the requirements for the activities of the UK Stem Cell
Bank in  relation to procuring, processing, testing  and  storing human  stem cell
lines,  and  providing  those for  basic  and  clinical research  leading  to the
development of therapeutic interventions. These principles, outlined in section 4,  will ensure that the UK Stem Cell Bank operates within a transparent, regulated
and ethical framework.
2.  Definition of stem cells
2.1  Stem cells 
Stem  cells have the capacity to divide to generate "daughter" cells that  retain 
the properties  of  the stem  cell,  or to  produce daughters  that  begin  to 
"differentiate" into a more specialised cell type, or to produce one daughter cell
of  each  type. Stem  cells  are thus  central to  normal human growth  and 
development, and are also a potential source of new cells for the regeneration of 
diseased or damaged tissue.  Stem  cells  are present  at  all stages  of 
development, and in many (possibly most) tissues of the adult. At present, stem 
cells are impossible to identify by their physical characteristics alone, although 
they can be enriched in a population of cells. Stem cells from different tissues, 
and  from different  stages  of  development,  vary  in  terms  of  the number and 
types of cells to which they normally give rise.  For the purposes of this Code of 
Practice,  the Steering  Committee has  defined four  classes  of stem  cells: 
embryonic  stem  cells,  somatic  stem  cells,  embryonic  germ  cells  and  induced 
pluripotent stem cells (see below).
Until it  is  known  which  stem cells  have the greatest  potential in  terms  of 
developing human therapies, the Steering Committee endorses  research on all
types of stem cells.
2.1.1 Embryonic Stem Cells 
At the earliest stages after fertilisation (up to about the eight cell stage) all the
cells of the embryo are "totipotent" (i.e. they have the capacity to develop into
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 7 of 45
every type of cell needed for full development, including extra­embryonic tissues 
such as the placenta and umbilical cord). After about five days the blastocyst 
stage is  reached.  Within  this  ball of  50 to  100  cells lies the inner cell mass,  which will develop into the embryo proper. The inner cell mass comprises about 
a quarter of the cells at this stage of development and a unique class of stem 
cells,  referred to  as  embryonic  stem (ES)  cells, can be derived from it.  Embryonic  stem  cells  derived from the mouse have the innate capacity
("potential") to differentiate into each of the 200 or so cell types which make up 
the body, and are described as "pluripotent" (see also glossary of terms).  The
capacity of  human  embryonic  stem  cells  to  contribute to  all tissue types  in 
development has not yet been fully established, though this potential has been 
demonstrated in “teratoma assays” whereby such cells can give rise to multiple
tissue types after transplantation into mice. Both human and mouse embryonic 
stem cells can, to the best of our knowledge, be grown over long periods of time 
in culture and expanded in number without changing their cellular phenotypes or 
genotypes.  In the case of mouse stem cells they  are also known to  maintain 
their pluripotent state under these culture conditions.
2.1.2 Embryonic Germ Cells 
In  mammals,  egg and  sperm  cells  (gametes)  are derived from  a founder
population of primordial germ cells set aside early in embryogenesis. Embryonic 
germ cells are a special class of stem cells that can be derived from primordial
germ cells, and in mice such cells have been shown to be pluripotent. However,  the situation for human embryonic germ cells is not yet clear. Other germ­line
stem  cells, notably spermatogonia,  can also be derived from  children or adults 
and maintained in culture. While these stem cells are usually "unipotent", in that 
they would naturally only give rise to sperm, it has been found that these too 
can  be manipulated in the laboratory to provide a subpopulation  of  cells that 
demonstrate aspects  of  pluripotency.  These cells  may  be equivalent  to 
embryonic germ cell lines, but are likely to have lost their genetic imprinting.
2.1.3 Somatic Stem Cells 
As  development proceeds  beyond the blastocyst, stem cells  comprise a
progressively decreasing proportion of cells in the embryo, fetus and body after
birth. However, many, if not most tissues in the fetus and human body contain 
stem cells which, in their normal location, have the potential to differentiate into 
a limited number of specific cell types in order to regenerate the tissue in which 
they normally  reside.  These stem  cells are described as  "multipotent".  Extra­  embryonic tissues  such as the placenta, amniotic fluid and umbilical cord also 
contain stem cells with the same genetic makeup as the cells of the embryo, and
under special laboratory  conditions  these cells  can  demonstrate a broader
potential to  differentiate,  although  whether these truly  represent  pluripotent 
cells remains controversial. 
Increasingly common is the use of mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSC’s) for 
regenerative medicine.  MSC’s are ubiquitously distributed in the body, but are
usually  harvested from either the bone marrow or adipose tissue.  They 
classically  show adipogenic,  chondrogenic  and  osteogenic  differentiation 
potential in line with  their normal developmental role,  but  may  elicit subtle
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 8 of 45
beneficial effects in many healing tissues through the release of paracrine­acting 
growth factors.
2.1.4 Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells 
Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells are a type of pluripotent stem cell derived
from a non­pluripotent cell, for example fully differentiated cells from adult skin. 
It has  been  established that  numerous  different  cell types  can  be used to 
produce iPS  cells,  which are believed to be like embryonic  stem  cells in many
respects.  For example they  express  certain  “stem  cell”  genes  and  show the
same ability to  differentiate; they  can  also form teratomas in  mice (a tumour
made of multiple tissue types). iPS  cells  were first produced in mouse cells in 
2006 by  introducing  retroviruses  containing key  genes  whose expression  was 
known to give rise to pluripotency in embryonic stem  cells. This approach was 
successfully  repeated in  human cells  in  2007.  Many different techniques  have
now been  used to  produce iPS  cells,  including  the introduction  of exogenous 
genes on non­integrating viral vectors and plasmids, and use of small molecules 
that  can  substitute for the products  of  “stem  cell”  genes.  The reprogramming 
factors used to generate iPS cells may vary and the absolute requirements are
not yet fully understood. 
The full extent of iPS cells’ relationship to natural pluripotent stem cells such as 
embryonic stem cells is still being assessed. Nevertheless, the discovery of iPS
cells provides a route to obtain pluripotent stem cells from patients to develop
cell­based models of disease and future therapeutic options.
2.1.5 The relationship  between  embryonic  stem cells  and  other  stem cells 
derived from embryonic or fetal tissue.
Embryonic stem cells are a very specific class of stem cell which can be derived
from the blastocyst and are considered to be pluripotent. Confusingly, stem cells 
derived from the early embryo after the blastocyst stage and from the fetus are
sometimes also referred to as ‘embryonic’ stem cells in the literature; however,  such  cells  are not  known  to  be pluripotent  and  (along with  extra­embryonic 
stem cells) are more akin to adult stem cells which have a more restricted ability
to  differentiate into  different  cell types.  They  are therefore referred to  in this 
Code of Practice as “somatic” stem cells.
2.2  Stem cell lines 
A stem  cell line comprises cells that can be expanded for prolonged periods in 
appropriate culture  conditions  without any change in  genotype or phenotype.  Embryonic stem cells can be maintained in this way, and a "normal, diploid" cell
line would not include cells which have been immortalised following any acquired
or induced  alteration  in  genotype,  such as those routinely  used in  biomedical
research. Stem  cells can also be derived from many adult tissues, although in 
the vast majority of cases it has not proved possible to maintain them as stem 
cell lines in the laboratory. However, in some instances genetic manipulation has 
been  used to  “conditionally” immortalise adult  stem  cells to  allow them to  be
maintained as (clonally­derived) cell lines; the immortalisation gene can then be
inactivated to allow the stem cells to differentiate.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 9 of 45
Importantly, phenotypically indistinguishable stem cell lines might have different 
differentiation  capacities; the basis  for this  is  not  yet  understood.  Ideally  cell
lines should be clonal, that is derived from a single cell.  In practice, however,  this criterion cannot always be satisfied.
2.3  The relationship of the Code of Practice to different types of stem cell
This  Code applies  to  all research involving established human  embryonic  stem 
(ES) cell lines, since their generation involves the destruction of human embryos.
Other pluripotent  stem  cell lines,  whether fetal,  somatic  or those generated
through induced pluripotency, fall outside this Code of Practice, although ethical
considerations remain in relation to their derivation and use. For example, these
cells may  be used extensively in research  resulting  in  a lot  of information 
becoming available about the cells, and potentially about the person from whom 
they were derived. If the cells were eventually used in therapy the donor’s genetic 
make up could be transplanted into potentially thousands of people. Researchers 
working  with these cells  should therefore  consider that  many of the issues  and 
regulations that apply for ES cells have relevance (for more detail see sections 3 
and 9.2). 
Similarly, the requirement to deposit human stem cell lines in the UK Stem cell
Bank only applies to ES cells, as required under HFEA licence. There is no such 
requirement to deposit iPS cells, fetal or somatic stem  cell lines within the UK 
Stem Cell Bank,  although the Steering Committee will consider applications to 
bank such lines  where these are likely  to  provide a valuable resource for
research (see Section 6).
3.  Legislation governing  the  establishment  and  use  of  human stem 
cell lines
3.1  The Human Tissue Act (2004) ­ (See page 44 for full web link)
The removal, storage and use of human material (organs, tissues  and 
cells) in England, Wales and Northern Ireland is governed by the Human 
Tissue Act  (2004) (HT Act). In  Scotland, the Human Tissue (Scotland) 
Act  2006  applies,  in addition to certain sections of the  2004 Act,
including those relating to storage of tissue for DNA analysis.
The HT Act makes  donor consent  a fundamental principle underpinning  the
lawful storage and use of human material and makes it an offence to use tissue
for  certain  purposes  without appropriate consent.  It  also  provides  for  the
establishment of the Human Tissue Authority (HTA), which holds  responsibility
for  licensing  activities  within  its  remit,  and  issues  codes  of  practice giving 
practical guidance on  the conduct  of  these activities.  In  Scotland  the basic 
approach  is  consistent but  the legislation  only  applies to  tissue from the
deceased and the HTA does not licence premises or activities in relation to the
HT Act.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 10 of 45
The Human Tissue Act  2004 applies  to  any material from  a human  body 
consisting of, or including human cells, with exception of hair and nail of a living 
person, and gametes  and embryos, which  are separately  regulated by the
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990). Established cell lines as well as 
any other human material created outside the human body are excluded from
the Act. However, it should be noted that cell lines that are intended for use in 
human application are regulated under the Human Tissue (Quality and Safety for
Human Application) Regulations 2007. 
Human tissue that is stored with the intention of deriving iPS cells for research 
needs  to  be stored under an  HTA research  licence and  the relevant  consent 
requirements complied with. These are discussed further in section 9.2.3. Once
an iPSC line has been derived it falls outside of the remit of the HT Act.
3.2  The European Union Tissue and Cells Directives and The Human Tissue
(Quality and Safety for Human Application) Regulations 2007 ­ (See page
44 for full web link) 
These Directives  apply  to  tissues  and  cells  (including  cell lines)  for  human 
application. The Directives  were transposed into UK law via the Human Tissue
(Quality and Safety for  Human Application) Regulations 2007 and became law
on  5  July  2007.  Under these Regulations  the Human Tissue Authority is 
responsible for regulating establishments across the whole of the UK. It licences 
and  inspects  establishments  involved in the procurement,  testing, processing,
storage,  distribution  and import/export of tissues  or cells  for  use in  human 
application.
3.3  The Human Fertilisation and Embryology  (HFE)  Act  (1990, 2001 and 
2008) ­ (See page 44 for full web link) 
The special regulations which govern the creation and use of human embryonic 
stem  cells  reflect the fact that the human embryo has a special moral status.  The position adopted by Parliament in this legislation is that the embryo, unlike
an  infant,  does  not have the full rights of  a person.  However,  its  human 
potential gives it an intrinsic value which implies that neither its creation nor its 
destruction  are to  be treated casually.  Regulation  of  research  on  human 
embryos in the UK is governed by the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 
1990,  which  was amended in 2001 to accommodate advances in human  stem 
cell research, and further revised in 2008. 
The Human Fertilisation  and  Embryology Authority (HFEA)  was  established
under the HFE  Act 1991.  This  HFEA subjects  all embryo research  in  both the
private and public sector to a robust system of case­by­case review before any
license to permit research is issued. No research is allowed on embryos over 14
days old.  At the time  of the 1991 Act,  embryo research  was restricted to the
study  of  infertility,  miscarriage and congenital disease.  In  2000,  the Chief
Medical Officer published Stem  Cell Research:  Medical Progress  with 
Responsibility, to  take account  of  contemporary  developments  in  embryonic 
stem cell research. Following this report and widespread debate in both houses 
of  Parliament,  the HFE  legislation  was  amended in  2001 to  allow the use of
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 11 of 45
embryos  for  stem  cell research.  The HFEA can  license the derivation  of  stem 
cells from embryos that are: (i) surplus to IVF requirements, or (ii) created by 
IVF specifically for  research purposes, or (iii) created by therapeutic cloning or
somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT).
Further amendments  were introduced in the HFE  Act  2008 to  allow for 
generation and use of defined categories of interspecies embryos, referred to as 
human  admixed embryos  (HAE)  for  research,  subject  to  the same  conditions 
that apply to human embryos. 
The categories of HAE authorised in the Act are: 
a.  ‘Cytoplasmic hybrid’: replacing the nucleus of an animal egg or cell with a
human nucleus, cell, gamete or two pronuclei,  b.  ‘True hybrid’: created from human and animal gametes or pronuclei, 
c.  ‘Transgenic human embryo’:  a human  embryo with  animal nuclear or
mitochondrial DNA inserted into any cell,  d.  ‘Chimeric human embryo’: a human embryo that has been altered by the
introduction of one or more animal cells, 
e.  any embryo  not  falling  within (a) to  (d)  which  contains  both  nuclear or
mitochondrial DNA of  a human  and nuclear or mitochondrial DNA of  an 
animal (“animal DNA”) but in which the animal DNA is not predominant. 
The Human  Fertilisation  and  Embryology Authority (HFEA)  is  the regulatory 
authority empowered to issue licences for research that involves the creation or
use of human or human admixed embryos. It is an offence to carry out any such 
research without a licence from the HFEA. A research licence will not be granted
unless the HFEA is satisfied that any proposed use of human or human admixed
embryos  is  necessary  for  the research  and that  the research  is  necessary  or
desirable for the purposes specified in the amended Act, namely: 
a.  increasing  knowledge about  serious  disease or other serious  medical
conditions, 
b.  developing  treatments  for serious  disease or other serious  medical
conditions, 
c.  increasing  knowledge about  the causes  of  any congenital disease or
congenital medical condition that does not fall within paragraph (a),
d.  promoting advances in the treatment of infertility, 
e.  increasing knowledge about the causes of miscarriage, 
f.  developing more effective techniques of contraception, 
g.  developing methods for detecting the presence of gene, chromosome or
mitochondrion abnormalities in embryos before implantation, or
h.  increasing knowledge about the development of embryos. 
Human or human admixed embryos created for research purposes may not be
implanted into a woman and must not be kept for longer than 14 days or the
appearance of the primitive streak, whichever occurs first.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 12 of 45
Licences  issued by  the HFEA are subject to  conditions.  Importantly,  HFEA
licences for projects involving the derivation of human embryonic stem cell lines 
require licencees to deposit a sample of each cell line generated in the UK Stem 
Cell Bank.  Licencees  are not  permitted by  the HFEA to  carry  out  secondary 
research projects on ES cells or to transfer ES cell lines to third parties without
the approval of the Steering Committee. 
The HFEA’s regulatory responsibility is for research using human embryos. Stem 
cells taken from an embryo are no longer the subject of regulation by HFEA with 
the exception of the requirement to fulfil conditions of the licence as described
above. The conservation and use of human embryonic stem cells and stem cell
lines is the responsibility of the Steering Committee (see Section 5).
The amended Act  makes  it  an  offence,  punishable by  up  to  10 years 
imprisonment and an unlimited fine on conviction, to implant into a woman an 
embryo other than  those “permitted”  by  legislation.  In  brief,  “permitted’” 
embryos are created from human eggs and sperm and have not had alterations 
to their DNA other than to prevent serious mitochondrial disease.
3.4  Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) Regulations 2004 ­ (See page
44 for full web link) 
Stem­cell (gamete­derived) cell based products that involve the destruction of a
human  embryo  in  their formulation  are initially  licensed by  the HFEA.  At  the
point  where the embryo  has  been  destroyed and  cells  are harvested these
human  cells  would fall under the remit  of  the HTA.  The development of a
product using these cells is under the remit of the HTA until such time as the
MHRA classifies the product as an Investigational Medicinal Product (IMP) or the
product  is  classified as  an  Advanced Therapy  Medicinal Product  (ATMP).  Once
this  classification  has  been  confirmed  the Manufacture,  Clinical Trial Approval
and Marketing approval (for IMPs) are under the remit of the MHRA and not the
HTA. 
Trials  of  IMPs  in the UK  are authorised and  regulated by  the Medicines and 
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). Stem cell lines that fall within 
the EU definition of medicinal product which are used in clinical trials to assess 
safety or efficacy in humans will be IMPs and such trials must be authorised by 
the MHRA.
3.5  EC Regulation on advanced therapy medicinal products 2007 ­ (See page
44 for full web link) 
It  is  obligatory  under the Regulation  that  all advanced therapy  medicinal
products  (ATMPs)  which  may  include  stem  cells  therapies  (regardless  of 
derivation)  are subject  to  the European  centralised marketing  authorisation 
procedure which is co­ordinated on behalf of the European Commission by the
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 13 of 45
European  Medicines  Agency (EMEA).  Such submissions  can be discussed with 
the MHRA1
.
3.6  Clinical trials involving the use of human stem cell lines ­ the role of the
Gene Therapy Advisory Committee (GTAC) ­ (See page 44 for full web link) 
GTAC  has  UK­wide responsibility for  the ethical oversight  of  proposals  to 
conduct clinical trials involving gene therapy or stem cell therapies derived from
stem  cell lines.  It is  both  a Government Scientific Advisory Committee and  a
Research  Ethics  Committee formally  recognised in  statute.  Its  terms  of 
reference are:
· To consider and advise on the acceptability of proposals for gene therapy 
research  on  human  subjects,  on  ethical grounds, taking  account  of the
scientific merits of the proposals and the potential benefits and risks.
· To consider and advise on the acceptability of proposals for research on 
human subjects using cells derived from stem cell lines, based on ethical
grounds, taking account of the scientific merits of the proposals and the
potential benefits and risks.
· To provide ethical advice on the use of unlicensed gene therapy and stem 
cell line derived therapies in humans.
· To  work  with  other agencies  which  have responsibilities  in  this  field, 
including  research  ethics  committees,  and  agencies  with  statutory 
responsibilities  ­  the Medicines  and  Healthcare products  Regulatory 
Agency,  the Human  Tissue Authority,  the Health  and Safety Executive
and the Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs.
· To  provide advice to  United Kingdom Health  Ministers  on  the above
matters. 
Researchers wishing to conduct clinical trials using products derived from stem 
cell lines  should contact  the GTAC  Secretariat  for  initial discussions  ( 
gtac@dh.gsi.gov.uk).
3.7  Overview of regulatory requirements 
Research involving human stem cells, and in particular the development of stem 
cell therapies, may involve many regulatory approvals. This is due to the nature
of  UK  and EU  legislation  by  which  embryos,  cells,  tissue,  clinical trials  and 
licensing  of  therapies  fall under separate legislation.  An  interactive resource
explaining all the UK regulatory requirements, information and points of contact 
within the relevant organisations is provided through the Department of Health 
/ Medical Research Council (MRC)  “UK Stem Cell Tool Kit” –  (See page 44 for 
full web link). This  resource allows  researchers  to  build a customised ‘map’ outlining all of the regulatory steps necessary to undertake research involving 
human  stem cells  and  to translate ideas  for  a new treatment from  the
laboratory to patients.
1 http://www.mhra.gov.uk/Howweregulate/Advancedtherapymedicinalproducts/index.htm
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 14 of 45
4.  The UK Stem Cell Bank and its Principles of Operation 
The House of Lords Select Committee on Stem Cell Research  recommended in 
2002 that a national stem cell bank should be established to prepare and store
stocks of frozen stem cell lines.  The UK Stem Cell Bank was established at the
National Institute for Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC), a centre for the
UK  Health  Protection Agency, in  January 2003,  with funding from the Medical
Research Council (MRC) and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research 
Council (BBSRC), to store ethically sourced, quality controlled, human stem cell
lines  from all sources  (adult,  fetal and embryonic)  on  a single site.  The
preparation of  cryopreserved stocks of a cell line comprising multiple aliquots, 
each of which can be used to regenerate a culture representative of the original
cell line. This is a fundamental element of good practice in the management of 
cell lines  for  laboratory  use and  for  the delivery  of  cells  for  use in clinical
application or product manufacture (Coecke et al., 2005; UKCCCR, 1999; WHO, 
1998).
The UK Stem Cell Bank facilitates the sharing of quality controlled stem cell lines 
by the clinical and research communities. In so doing supports research that will
help to  better understand human  development and  disease and  aid the
development of strategies to treat serious diseases.  It will also reduce the need
for individual research teams to generate their own stem cell lines, minimise the
use of  human  tissues,  and  enable different  researchers  to  work  on  identical
material so that direct comparisons may be made between studies. 
In order to avoid conflicts of interest, the UK Stem Cell Bank has been located in 
an independent national institution.  The Bank does not receive or store human 
embryos;  neither does it conduct  discovery  research  on the banked stem  cell
lines  nor carry  out research  into  stem  cell biology.  With the approval of the
Steering  Committee,  the UK  Stem  Cell Bank may  pursue  research  aimed  at 
improving banking, characterisation, safety testing and preservation of stem cell
lines  and  it  must  also  obtain  permission  from the MRC and the Steering 
Committee before applying for any supplementary funding. All staff working for 
the UK  Stem  Cell Bank are required to  refrain  from activities  that  might 
represent a conflict of interest with the operation of the UK Stem Cell Bank as an 
independent organisation  within the stem  cell field and  are required to submit 
information to the NIBSC register of conflicts of interest. 
The UK Stem Cell Bank will store and distribute stem cell lines, but ownership of 
any Intellectual Property embodied in  the these lines  remains  with  the
originator. To obtain stem cell lines deposited after April 2010 the requestor will
be required to sign a Research Use Licence which will set out the terms of use
for that line. Stem cell lines deposited before April 2010 will only be released by 
the Bank to  requestors  when  an  appropriate agreement or (licence), between 
the requestor and  the originator,  is  in  place to  cover intellectual property
aspects of line ownership. 
Significant  progress  in  stem  cell research  can  only  be made through 
international collaboration and it has therefore been agreed that the UK Stem 
Cell Bank can be accessed by researchers from academia and industry in the UK
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 15 of 45
and abroad.  Overseas researchers have to undergo the same review procedures 
as researchers in the UK (see Section 7 and 8).
This section, along with sections 5 & 6, describes the standards of best practice
that  the UK Stem  Cell Bank adopts  in  the procurement,  processing, testing,
preservation and supply of stem cell lines. It also specifies the criteria against 
which the UK Stem  Cell Bank will be audited by the Steering  Committee and 
sponsors.  The diligent application and verification of the principles of operation 
laid down  for  the Bank should provide confidence and  reassurance to 
professionals  and the public  that the UK Stem  Cell Bank is  adhering  to best 
practice and complies with these principles.
4.1  Ethical Principles 
The UK Stem Cell Bank has been charged with providing ethically sourced and 
quality controlled adult, fetal and embryonic human stem cell lines for research 
and  the development of  therapies. All UK  researchers  deriving human 
embryonic stem cell lines are required, as a condition of their HFEA licence, to 
lodge samples of their embryonic stem cell lines in the UK Stem Cell Bank. This 
is  not  a requirement for  iPSC and somatic  cell lines,  although  appropriately 
derived lines may also be deposited in the UK Stem Cell Bank. 
Embryonic  stem  cell lines  derived in  the UK  are thus  subject to  the donor
consent requirements of the HFEA, including those relating to donor anonymity.  The Steering  Committee (section  5.1)  has  responsibility for  ensuring  that 
essential donor consents,  ethical approvals,  licences  and  authorisations  are in 
place for  all stem  cell lines  deposited in  the UK  Stem  Cell Bank,  and  for all
projects  receiving  cell lines  from it.  For traceability purposes,  copies  of  the
signed donor consent forms relating to cell lines accepted for deposit in the UK 
Stem Cell Bank are lodged with the Secretary to the Steering Committee who 
maintains  these records in  strictest  confidence.  Information  relating  to  the
identity of the donors is neither revealed to the Steering Committee members 
nor, importantly, to staff of the UK Stem Cell Bank.  Thus Bank staff have no 
contact  whatsoever with the donors  of the embryos from which the stem  cell
lines are derived, are not involved in the consenting process nor do they know
the identities of the donors.
4.2  Quality Assurance
4.2.1 The UK Stem Cell Bank Quality Management System
In  order to  comply  with  the Human  Tissues  (Quality and  Safety for  Human 
Applications)  Regulations  (2007), which  deliver the requirements  of  the EU 
Tissues  and  Cells  Directive (2004/23/EC,  2006/17/EC  and  2006/86/EC), the
Bank has put in place a Quality Management System which covers all licensable
activities  as  set  out  in  HTA Directions.  This  Quality Management System,
described in the UK  Stem  Cell Bank’s  Quality Manual,  ensures the safety and 
quality of the stem cell lines prepared by the Bank. 
An  effective document management system  has  been  established so  that  all
relevant  documents  (policies,  procedures,  sample/user records,  quality control
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 16 of 45
records, training  records etc.) relating to the processes carried out in the Bank
are properly recorded. Documents are version controlled and archived to ensure 
that obsolete versions cannot be used. 
Each cell line and the cell banks prepared from it must be correctly identified at 
all times.  This is achieved by using unique identifiers traceable to the respective
cell line’s accession number.  This is linked to the Steering Committee’s unique
application number. This system of unique identifiers maintains donor anonymity
but still allows for traceability from donor to recipient or vice­versa in the event 
of a discovery which might significantly affect the health of the donor. 
Records are maintained for each cell line. These provide evidence that the cell
line has been procured, processed, tested, stored and released according to the
procedures  described in  the Quality Management System. This  information  is 
held, together with the original application form,  Materials  Deposit Agreement
and information on the cell line supplied by the depositor, in a Cell Line Master
File.  Once information  including  all test  data  has  been  received and  the file
completed it is independently reviewed and authorised by the Bank’s Operations 
and Quality Managers or their designees. 
Any deviations,  errors,  or anomalies in procedures as  well as  complaints from
users  are also  managed within  the Quality Management System. These are
documented and  reviewed and reported annually in the Bank’s Annual Report. 
Resolution of  such events is linked to a programme of preventative actions to 
assure continuous improvement in the Bank’s operation. 
In addition to the compliance reporting required by the HTA, the Bank operates 
a system  of  internal quality audits  to  monitor compliance with  the HTA
Directions,  and  identify areas  for improvement in  its  quality system. These
audits are planned and conducted by appropriately qualified individuals who are
independent of the Bank’s operational management.  Inspections are performed
by the Competent Authority, the HTA, which licences the Bank for the purposes 
of processing, testing, storage and distribution (including import and export) of 
cell lines intended for clinical use.
4.2.2 Role of Staff and External Advisors 
The UK  Stem  Cell Bank operates  under a licence from the Human  Tissue
Authority. Under the Human Tissue Act (2004) and The Human Tissues (Quality
and  Safety for  Human  Applications)  Regulations  (2007), the Bank’s  Licence
Holder (LH)  and Designated Individual (DI)  have primary  (legal)  responsibility 
for, and play a key role in implementing the requirements of the licence. 
Responsibility for the operation of the Bank, as set out in HTA Directives, and for 
ensuring that  staff  comply  with the Quality  Management System lies  with the
Bank’s  Operations  Manager.  The Operations  Manager reports  directly  to  the
Designated Individual in  all matters  relating  to  processing, testing, storage,  distribution, import and export of stem cell lines.  The Quality Manager for the
Bank is  responsible for quality assurance as defined in the HTA Directions and 
provides  advice and  support  on  quality matters.  The Quality Manager is 
independent of the Bank and reports directly to the Licence Holder. Jointly, the
Operations  Manager and Quality Manager are responsible for  authorising  the
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 17 of 45
release of stem  cell lines. Deputies for each of the key post within the quality
management system  have been  identified  and  all members  of  staff,  working 
under the HTA licence,  have documented job descriptions  which  detail their
responsibilities. 
The quality of the cell banks  prepared by the Bank is the responsibility of  all
members of  staff working  under the HTA licence and  all staff are expected to 
take personal responsibility for the quality of their work and maintain an up­to­ 
date record of training which includes annual statements of competency. 
The Bank maintains access to expert medical and microbiological advice through 
a Medical Advisor and  a Microbiological Advisor.  These advisors  must  be
appropriately  trained in  order to  discharge their responsibilities  to  the Bank.  Their roles and responsibilities are documented in formal job description.
4.2.3 Facilities and Procedures 
All facilities,  process  and  critical equipment used in  the processing, testing,
storage and supply  of  cell lines  have been  qualified and  validated and are
maintained to meet the requirements of the Human Tissue (Quality and Safety
for  Human Application) Regulations  (2007)  as  set  out in  HTA Directions.  The
cell culture  procedures  adopted by the UK Stem  Cell Bank meet  current  best 
practice.
4.3  Operation of the Stem Cell Bank 
In  order to  effectively  manage procurement,  processing, testing, storage and
distribution,  all stem  cell lines  regardless  of  their designation  as  either
“Laboratory” or “Clinical” Grade are banked in facilities by processes that comply 
with the UK Stem Cell Bank’s Quality Management System. Cell lines for clinical
research or therapy in humans (“Clinical Grade”) must undergo additional levels 
of testing commensurate with risk (see also section 6.5).
4.3.1 Deposit of Stem Cell Lines 
The UK Stem Cell Bank ensures that for each cell line accessioned by the Bank,  there is evidence of approval for deposit by the Steering Committee; that there
is traceability to a Steering Committee References Number (the SCSC number) 
and that any constraints on the use or release of the cell line, either made by 
the depositor or by the original donor are clearly documented and available to 
researchers.  The Bank also  seeks  documented evidence from the Steering
Committee that donor consent (as set out in section 9) complies with HFEA and
HTA requirements. 
Depositors are required to provide a minimum number of aliquots of their cell
line from the earliest passage level that is consistent with proven viability.  The
samples  provided must be viable and  free from contamination  or otherwise
compromised such that its scientific value cannot be recovered. Non­viable or
contaminated samples will be reported to the depositor and repeated failure to
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 18 of 45
supply samples of an approved line shall be reported to the Steering Committee
for appropriate action. 
Following  notification  by  the Steering  Committee that  a cell line has  been 
approved for deposit the bank will contact the depositor to begin the process of 
accessioning  the cell line into  the Bank.  This  will involve personnel from the
Bank and the depositor’s laboratory who will together identify a suitable stock of 
cells for  transfer and  also  gather the requisite information  and  available test 
data that will allow the Bank to culture the cell line. 
Each cell line deposited must meet the UK Stem Cell Bank’s specification which 
details  the requirements  for  deposit  in  terms  of  viability,  safety and 
characterisation. Additional requirements for ‘clinical grade’ cell lines will need to 
be met in order for the UK Stem Cell Bank to comply with the Directions of the
Human Tissue Authority. 
Each  cell line deposited in  the Bank receives  a unique UK Stem  Cell Bank
accession number and any replacement samples of a cell line provided by the
depositor for whatever reason will receive a new accession number.
4.3.2 Banking of Stem Cell Lines 
Before  culturing, the Bank carries  out  an  evaluation  of  each  cell line in 
consultation  with  the depositor to  determine the method of  culture and  the
types of characterisation that may be required. The banking procedures followed
by the bank will normally include the establishment of a ‘Pre­master’ stock of 
cells prepared from material supplied by the depositor. This comprises a number
of  aliquots  from  a single pooled culture of  cells.  This,  early  passage stock  of 
cells,  provides  material for  initial testing and  archival material for  disaster
recovery or confirmation of adverse discoveries affecting the cell line. 
A sample of the ‘Pre­master’ cell bank is  expanded to  provide a ‘Master’ cell
bank that will, once established, provide the bank from which will be derived all
future distributed material. Samples of the Master bank are used to produce a
‘Distribution’ cell bank from which cells are released to users. This stock, once
exhausted,  is  replenished by  further culture of  samples  from the Master cell
bank.  Each  cell bank is  quality controlled and  characterised appropriately.  In 
general each cell line is cultured and preserved according to methods provided
by  the depositor up  to  the level of  the first  ‘Distribution’ cell bank.  Generic 
procedures  being  developed by  the Bank will be applied to  subsequent 
‘Distribution’ cell banks; however the ‘Master’ cell bank will be as representative
as possible of the original cells provided by the depositor. All cell banks whether
at the Pre­master, Master or Distribution levels, are assigned a unique cell bank
number.  Each  aliquot  of  cells  within  a cell bank is  also  assigned its  own 
identifier.
4.3.3 Qualification and Testing of Stem Cell Lines 
Each  cell bank is  tested for  viability,  mycoplasma contamination,  sterility, 
mandatory viral markers  and identity as  a minimum.  The cell lines  are
maintained under quarantine conditions until the first mycoplasma and sterility 
tests  are completed.  In  addition  to  the quality control and characterisation
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 19 of 45
tests,  phenotypic  and  genotypic  stability will eventually  be determined using 
techniques appropriate for each cell line. This process will assure consistency of 
cells in the banking process and ultimately the minimum population doublings or
passages  recommended for the use of each  cell line. Once completed the test 
data and other information is used to prepare a certificate of analysis for each 
cell line released. 
Any genetic testing undertaken on the stem cell lines by the UK Stem Cell Bank
is  kept  in  strict  confidence by  the Bank unless  otherwise approved by  the
Steering Committee.  Any adverse discoveries of a genetic or infectious nature
are discussed with  the microbiological and  medical advisors  and  where
necessary the Steering Committee before appropriate action is taken. 
On completion of the banking process the depositor is offered a sample of the
UK Stem Cell Bank’s stocks to evaluate. Any significant deviations between bank
test data and that of the depositor’s laboratory are discussed with the depositor
and  an  appropriate course of action,  or appropriate annotation in the cell line
entry in the UK Stem Cell Bank inventory of stem cell lines, agreed. 
All information  pertaining  to  the deposit,  processing,  testing, storage and
distribution  of  each  cell is  held in  its  Cell Line Master File.  Once banking  and 
testing  of  the cell line has  been  completed,  this  file is  reviewed by  both  the
Operation  Manager and  Quality Managers. The Cell Line Master File must  be
reviewed and approved by them before the cell line is released for use.  Where testing is  carried out by third parties,  whether internally through other
NIBSC  divisions  or with  external agencies,  written  agreements  defining  the
relationship and  specifying  the services  required will be put  in  place.  These
agreements will comply with HTA Directions.
4.3.4 Storage and Distribution of Stem Cell Lines 
The UK Stem Cell Bank defines and documents the conditions under which the
stem  cell lines are stored. Cell lines are stored under conditions that as far as 
possible prevent  both  the deterioration  of  the material and  possible cross­ 
contamination. A proportion of each bank is stored in a secure off­site location. 
All storage equipment is validated, monitored and alarmed. 
Cell lines  are transported to  and  from  the UK  Stem  Cell Bank in  validated
containers that ensure the cells are maintained at an appropriate temperature.  Appropriate transportation times and temperatures are defined and documented
by the Bank.  It is the Bank’s policy only to ship frozen or vitrified material.  The
UK  Stem  Cell Bank does  not  supply  growing  cultures  of  stem  cells to  third
parties. 
The Bank has put  in  place documented procedures  for sales  order processing 
and  dispatch of  stem cell lines to  customers.  Dispatch  of  cells  is  carried out 
under ISO9001 through  the NIBSC  dispatch  department.  This  includes  the
tracking of shipped samples and the maintenance of records of shipment. The
Bank charges the full cost of shipment including where appropriate the return of 
Bank’s transportation containers.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 20 of 45
The Bank’s requirements, both for off­site storage and dispatch services, are the
subject of written agreements which will comply with HTA Directions.
4.3.5 Recall and Disposal of Stem Cell Lines 
The UK Stem Cell Bank requires all depositors and users of stem cell lines and 
other third party service providers  to  have in  place a procedure  for  adverse
event and  adverse incident  reporting. The Bank has a documented procedure 
for  the recall of  lines  in  the event  of  an  adverse incident  or event  and  for
reporting  such  events  to  the HTA.  This  procedure complies  with  the Human 
Tissues  (Quality and  Safety for  Human  Applications)  Regulations  (2007)  and 
provides for:
· prevention of distribution of affected cell lines,
· communication of recall notices to all relevant parties,
· reconciliation of returned lines,
· storage quarantine and disposal of returned samples and
· assuring  appropriate action  in  relation  to adverse event  reporting  in 
compliance with the above mentioned regulation. 
Disposal procedures  for material are documented in  the UK Stem  Cell Bank
quality management system  and are compliant  with  local policy,  the Human 
Tissue Act  (2004)  and  the Human  Tissue (Quality and  Safety for  Human 
Application) Regulations 2007.
The Steering  Committee requires  that  embryonic  stem  cell lines  considered
unsuitable for release are quarantined and archived rather than discarded.  In 
the case of  cell banks,  where there are multiple samples  in storage, only  a
limited number of  units  are retained with the remainder being disposed of  as 
clinical waste under NIBSC  documented procedures. In the case of  material
found to be derived from Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy (TSE, also 
known as prion diseases or CJD) ­ affected donors, the Steering Committee will
be engaged in the decision on  storage and disposal.  The process for disposal
must  be suitable for  the inactivation  of  any infectious  agents  known  or
suspected to be involved.
4.3.6 Inventory of Stem Cell Lines 
A list of all stem cell lines approved by the Steering Committee for deposit in the
Bank is maintained on the UK Stem Cell Bank website.  The stem cell ‘catalogue’
includes  general information  on the depositor, the cell line and  any ethical or
consent constraints imposed by the depositor or donor. Once a cell line has been 
banked, tested and approved for  release to  researchers, its listing in the stem 
cell catalogue is amended to include scientific information and test data as well
as  any other pertinent  information.  The Bank’s  catalogue is  different  to  the
Steering  Committee UK  Stem  Cell Lines  Registry  which  lists  all the lines that 
have been approved by the Steering Committee for use in the UK, regardless of 
whether they are available from the Bank (see section 7.2).
4.3.7 Assessment of Risk and Contingency Planning 
The UK Stem Cell Bank has put in place a high­level risk assessment, managed
through the NIBSC risk register and  reviewed annually.  This register of risk is
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 21 of 45
reported to  the Management Committee and  included  in  the Bank’s  Annual
Report to the Steering Committee.  In addition to this general risk register each 
cell line is risk assessed against a number of criteria.  The Bank will put in place
an extended  risk based assessment for “Clinical Grade” cell lines based on the
HTA Directions. 
The Bank has put in place policies and procedures to ensure  continuity in the
supply of stem  cell lines under adverse circumstances, which includes back­up 
for  critical systems  and an  off­site stock  for  disaster recovery. It  includes  a
policy for  securing the Bank’s  stock of  cell lines in the event of  closure of the
Bank. 
NIBSC ensures that all stored data is secure and regularly backed­up to secure 
storage. Access to the site and to the Bank is strictly controlled.
4.3.8 Health and Safety 
NIBSC operates a comprehensive health and safety policy in line with statutory 
requirements,  including  the appointment  of  a full­time  safety adviser,  and 
occupational health  staff.  A comprehensive safety training  programme is 
provided to  all members  of  staff  on  commencement of their employment  and 
staff undergo mandatory refresher course at the NIBSC proscribed interval.
5.  Governance  of  research  involving  established  human embryonic
stem cell lines
Unlike human  embryos,  embryonic  stem cells  do not  have the potential to 
become a human person and do not therefore have the moral status of human 
embryos.  Accordingly  the Government has  passed legislation  that  establishes 
that  research  involving established stem  cell lines  does  not  need the same 
regulation to which embryo research is subject to by the HFEA. However, as the
generation of  embryonic  stem cell lines  involves  the destruction of  human 
embryos, oversight in the form of a Steering Committee was recommended to 
ensure  that  research  performed  is  in  keeping  with  HFEA Regulations.  The
oversight mechanisms governing research involving established embryonic stem 
cell lines are voluntary. However, they are a condition of the statutory regulation 
in the UK and there is an expectation by Government that these are adhered to.
Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells have similar properties to human embryonic 
stem  cells  but  are derived from  adult  cells  and  are not subject to  such 
considerations. The only exception to this would be under circumstances where
iPS  cells  might  be used to  generate reproductive cells  such  as  oocytes  or
spermatozoa – any use of such derivatives for reproductive purposes would fall
under the remit  of  the HFEA.  Broad ethical considerations  in  relation  to  the
derivation and use of iPS cells are discussed in section 9.
5.1  Steering Committee for the UK Stem Cell Bank and for the Use of Stem
Cell Lines
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 22 of 45
The Steering Committee was established in December 2002 as an independent 
national committee overseeing the UK  Stem  Cell Bank and research  involving 
established human embryonic stem  cell lines, whether obtained from the Bank
or from elsewhere.  All applications to deposit stem cell lines in the UK Stem Cell
Bank or to  access  banked stem  cell lines  are evaluated by  the Steering 
Committee.  The Steering  Committee is  a non­statutory  body  that  reports 
annually to the MRC, works closely with the DH, the HFEA, HTA and the MHRA,  and briefs Ministers as necessary.  It is the role of the Steering Committee to 
support stem cell research and to ensure that this is conducted within an ethical
framework that is transparent to the public. The membership of the Committee
includes  expertise in  science,  medicine,  ethics  and  theology  as  well as  lay 
members  and  representatives  from regulatory  and  funding  agencies.  The
membership and  terms  of  reference are available on  the MRC  web site.  (Steering Committee) – (See page 43 for full web link)
5.2  UK Stem Cell Bank Management Committee
A Management Committee for the UK Stem Cell Bank has been established by 
NIBSC to deal with operational issues.  Its terms of reference and membership,  which includes in­house and external scientific experts, stem cell scientists, lay 
members, representatives from the commercial sector and the funding agencies, 
are published on the MRC website (Bank Management Committee) – (See page
43 for  full web link). The Management Committee reviews  the processes, 
systems  and  standards that  must  be followed by the UK  Stem  Cell Bank.  In 
partnership with  the Bank,  it  develops and  reviews  the Bank’s  strategic 
objectives  which  it  presents  to  the Steering  Committee.  Implementation  of 
these objectives is the responsibility of the relevant Manager for the Bank under
the supervision  of  the Bank’s  Director.  The Management Committee reports 
formally  to  the Steering  Committee through  the Director of  the Bank and 
provides to it a full written report on an annual basis.
5.3  Audit 
The funders  of the UK Stem Cell Bank may,  with  reasonable notice to NIBSC, 
inspect  documents,  practices  and other information  (and  take away  copies 
considered necessary)  about  management  of  the Bank and  to  examine the
financial records  relating  to  the operation  of  the Bank,  in  order to  assure
themselves about compliance with high standards of internal management and
financial control, and with guidelines established by the Steering Committee. 
The Steering Committee reserves the right to seek periodic independent audit of 
the research  carried out  by  both  UK  and overseas  researchers  with  stem  cell
lines deposited in, or obtained from the UK Stem Cell Bank, in order to assure
compliance with relevant regulations and permissions. Immediate action will be
taken if there is evidence of non­compliance with, or deviation from, appropriate
licences, authorisations and formal procedures (e.g. withdrawal of the line from
the Bank, exclusion of a researcher from future use of the Bank, reporting non­ 
compliances to the researcher’s host Institution, funders and national regulators.
5.4  Annual Reports
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 23 of 45
The UK Stem Cell Bank reports on a regular basis to its Management Committee
and the Steering  Committee and  an  annual report,  approved by  Management
Committee, is submitted to the Steering Committee and published on the Bank’s 
website.  This  report  should include  reviews  of  bank activity,  including  cell
banking  and  distribution,  changes  in  staff,  research  and  development,  quality
assurance audits and their outcomes, risk management and finance.
5.5  Engagement with the Stem Cell Community and the Public 
The Bank has established an independent website (www.ukstemcellbank.org.uk) 
which includes a catalogue of stem  cell lines held by the Bank, information on 
depositing  and  accessing  cell lines and  other useful information  for  users 
including links to other relevant websites.  It has also established an enquiries 
email line (enquiries@ukstemcellbank.org.uk). A documented process  for 
handling  general enquiries  and  complaints  has  been  established under the
Quality Management System  and targets for  response times  have been  set. 
Customers can expect a formal response to enquiries within five working days. 
Periodically, the Bank will contact  researchers  and other customers who have
used the Bank’s cell lines to obtain summaries of their work and compile these
reports for presentation to users of the Bank. In this way users may be able to 
benefit from responses on use of the cell lines (both positive and negative data)
obtained directly on cells provided by the UK Stem Cell Bank. 
The UK Stem Cell Bank will also establish relationships with other national stem 
cell banking  resource centres  to  share knowledge and best practice.  It  will
continue to  interact  with  national and international research initiatives,  contributing on those aspects of research in which it is permitted to engage by 
the Steering Committee. 
The UK Stem Cell Bank will continue to engage with all those interested in stem 
cells and their application through its ongoing programme of external activities 
including  contributions  to  training  courses,  attendance at  exhibitions  and 
presentations  at  scientific  meetings. This  engagement will include  periodic 
questionnaires  to  recipients  of  lines  and  communications  via the UK  National
Stem Cell Network and its annual conference.  The bank also supports activities 
that  explain  the rationale for stem  cell research  and banking, including  the
provision of suitable information to the general public.
6.  Deposit and Withdrawal of Stem Cell Lines from the UK Stem Cell 
Bank
This section deals with the processes and requirements for depositing stem cell
lines  in  and  accessing  stem  cell lines  from the UK  Stem  Cell Bank.  General
principles underlying the use of human embryonic stem cell lines in the UK and 
for obtaining stem cell lines from sources other than the UK Stem Cell Bank can 
be found in sections 7 and 8. 
The UK  Stem  Cell Bank stores  and  makes  available human  embryonic  and
somatic  stem  cell lines.  The UK Stem Cell Bank does not store heterogeneous
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 24 of 45
pools of stem cells that contain or are merely enriched for stem cells (e.g. bone
marrow, peripheral blood or cord blood).
It is a condition of an HFEA licence that a representative proportion of the cell
line(s) derived from each embryo donated altruistically must be made available
for research use via the UK Stem Cell Bank. This can be satisfied by one of the
following: 
A.  Deriving research grade stem cell lines for distribution from master cell
banks, that themselves  can be laboratory or clinical grade, so that all
clinical grade cell lines  have research  grade counterparts available for
distribution. 
B.  Banking  a subset  from  the separate cell lines  that  are sometimes 
obtained during the derivation process from a single embryo, provided
each daughter cell line had appropriate ES cell characteristics.  C.  Other approaches may be possible that  would lead to the desired end 
and  these could be proposed by  the depositor and  discussed by  the
Steering Committee. 
Consent procedures for these cell lines are audited by the HFEA. The Steering 
Committee also encourages the deposition of human embryonic stem  cell lines 
derived outside the UK as well as somatic stem  cell lines derived in the UK or
abroad as long as these fulfil the criteria of informed consent and are of value to 
the research community. 
Derivatives  of  banked human embryonic  stem  cell lines,  including genetically 
modified,  abnormal or differentiated cells, do  not  need to be deposited in the
Bank (unless this is a requirement of the funding agreement under which such 
lines  were generated,  for example funding from the UK  Research  Councils  2).
However the Steering  Committee would welcome deposit  of  such  lines  that 
would be scientifically useful to the research community.
6.1  Depositing Stem Cell Lines in the UK Stem Cell Bank
All applications to deposit embryonic stem cell lines in the Bank are made to the
Steering Committee and not to the Bank. Before accepting  stem  cell lines for 
deposition in the Bank, the Steering Committee has to satisfy itself that these
have been ethically sourced, with fully informed donor consent, and that the cell
lines  present  a valuable resource for the biomedical research community.  In 
order to provide the Steering Committee with the information needed to make
an informed decision about the deposition of cell lines in the Bank, researchers 
are requested to complete an application form. This can be found on the Bank’s 
website together with information on the application process. Information on the
application procedure is also provided in section 8. 
Before  stem  cell lines approved for deposit by the Steering Committee can be
released for  use,  a Material Deposition  Agreement (MDA)  has  to  be signed
between the owner of the cell lines  (normally the employer of the researcher
who has derived the stem cell line) and the Bank. This agreement sets out the
2 http://www.mrc.ac.uk/Utilities/Documentrecord/index.htm?d=MRC001898
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 25 of 45
terms under which the cell line is deposited and includes the terms under which 
the cell line is made available to accessors. When ES cell lines are deposited the
MDA should incorporate a statement  on  existing  Intellectual Property Rights 
(IPR).
Research grade lines deposited after 01 April 2010 can be distributed by the UK 
Stem  Cell Bank under its  own terms  of  use including  a Research  Use Licence
(RUL).  This  licence will be available for  laboratory  use (excluding  research in 
humans)  of  stem  cell lines  without an  individually  negotiated Material Use
Licence (MUL). The RUL is  designed to  protect  the depositor’s  rights  to 
intellectual property and standardize the process of  accessing  lines  from the
Bank. The RUL is available on the UK Stem Cell Bank website. 
The Material Deposition  Agreement is  available on  the UK  Stem  Cell Bank
website.  This  is  negotiated between the owner of the stem  cell lines  and the
Bank on a case by case basis. It is recommended that the depositor’s technology 
transfer staff are alerted to  the MDA at an  early  stage to  avoid unnecessary 
delays. 
The UK Stem Cell Bank will provide Depositors with information on request as to 
who has accessed their cell lines, and information on their use as described in 
the abstract provided on the relevant application to the Steering Committee.
6.2  Examples of stem cell lines  that  can be deposited in the UK Stem Cell 
Bank
· human embryonic stem cell lines
· human stem  cell lines from extra­embryonic tissues  (trophoblast and yolk 
sac endoderm)
· human embryonic germ cell lines
· human mesenchymal stem cell lines and other somatic stem cell lines from
any stage of development, if available
· human fetal / progenitor stem cell lines  (N.B. fetal stem  cells are neither
clonal nor immortal, though some progenitors such as neural stem cell lines 
can be)
· induced pluripotent stem cell lines
· haematopoietic stem cell lines from cord blood or bone marrow (N.B. these
might be propagated using genetic manipulations, new culture conditions, 
or growth factors)
· stable, human somatic stem cell lines derived from embryonic stem cells
· conditionally immortalised human progenitor/stem cell lines (N.B. these can 
only be deposited in the Bank if depositors can make a persuasive case to 
the Steering Committee that the lines are of outstanding research value to 
the scientific community).
In addition the Bank will curate cells used to facilitate the growth of embryonic 
stem cell lines in culture (e.g. standardised feeder cells).
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 26 of 45
6.3  Curation Policy 
For each  cell line approved by the Steering Committee the Bank will apply its 
Banking  and Curation  Policy,  established by  its  Management Committee and 
approved by the Steering Committee.  This determines the level to which each 
deposit is progressed in terms of banking and testing. This policy is based on the
duty of the bank to provide safe storage of a sample of each cell line approved
by the Steering Committee, and also on the need to develop the scientific value
of the UK Stem Cell Bank holdings.
The UK Stem Cell Bank recognises two forms of deposit: banking and curation. 
Banking is defined as the expansion of a stem cell line to form one or more stem 
cell banks for eventual release for research or therapeutic applications.  Curation 
is defined as the custodianship of a limited stock of a stem cell line for storage
or archival purposes only. 
In order to  facilitate transparency the Bank applies  published criteria.  These
criteria will be subject to periodic review and the status of all cell lines held by 
the UK  Stem  Cell Bank is  reviewed on  an  annual basis.  Any changes to the
designation of the cell line shall be notified to the Depositor and published on 
the Bank’s website.
6.4  Accessing Stem Cell Lines from the UK Stem Cell Bank 
All applications to access embryonic stem cell lines from the Bank are made to 
the Steering Committee and not to the Bank.  In order to provide the Steering
Committee with  the information  needed to  oversee research  involving stem 
lines,  researchers  are required to  complete the relevant  application  form 
following the guidance set out in Section 7 and provided on the Bank’s website. For access to  lines  other than  embryonic  stem  cell lines,  applications  may  be
made directly to the Bank. 
For access to lines deposited after 01 April 2010 all accessors of stem cell lines 
only for laboratory use will be required to sign a standard Research Use Licence
(RUL).  The RUL is  designed to  protect  the depositor’s  rights  to intellectual
property.  If an accessor plans to use a stem cell line for commercial or clinical
purposes  they  will need to  negotiate a specific  licence for  “commercial
manufacture and sale” or for “clinical use” with the depositor. These licences will
set out the terms for exploitation of the stem  cell line.  IP holders  will not be
obliged to issue a Clinical Use Licence as a research grade component for each 
line would be available for research use. The Commercial Manufacture and Sale
Licence should be subject to standard commercial negotiation between IP holder
and  any potential user and  will not  have any restrictions  imposed by  the
Steering Committee. 
For lines deposited prior to 31 March 2010, where the terms of deposit require
the accessor to agree a Material Use Licence (MUL), the accessors will still have
to negotiate the terms for that licence with the depositor.  In addition they will
have to sign the Material Access Agreement (MAA) supplied by the Bank.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 27 of 45
Whilst agreements  can be negotiated before Steering Committee approval has 
been given, the agreements can only be executed following Steering Committee
approval. Once the UK Stem Cell Bank receives confirmation approval to access 
a banked cell line and signed copies of appropriate agreements are in place the
Bank will despatch  the cell line(s). It  is  recommended that  the accessor’s 
technology transfer staff are alerted to the need for these access agreements to 
avoid unnecessary delay. 
The Bank can be accessed by researchers from academia and industry in the UK 
and abroad. All applications must be approved by the host institution (academia
or companies) and for overseas applicants the same  review procedures by the
Steering Committee apply. Researchers accessing stem cell lines from the Bank
must comply with legislation in the UK and the country where the research is to 
be performed and are expected to comply with this Code of Practice. Any change
to the terms of the application approved by the Steering Committee should be
discussed with  the secretariat  to  the Steering  Committee and  may  require a
fresh application as approvals are given by the Steering Committee on a project 
by project basis. Where approval is given by the Steering Committee for use of a 
line in a consortium project or where there are multiple named collaborators, it 
is the responsibility of the lead applicant to ensure that the Code of Practice is 
adhered to by all the partners.  Third party transfer of lines supplied by the Bank
is not permitted save where specified in the MAA or RUL. 
Researchers should notify the UK Stem Cell Bank if cell lines accessed from the
Bank fail to  exhibit  expected properties.  Complaints  will be documented and
investigated under the Bank’s Quality Management System (see section 4.2.1).
Stem cell lines accessed from the UK Stem Cell Bank will have been allocated a
unique Bank accession  number;  this  should be quoted by  accessors  in  all
publications. 
The UK Stem Cell Bank will supply both ‘laboratory’ grade stem cell lines that 
cannot be used in human application, and ‘clinical’ grade lines which have been 
derived and processed in  facilities  approved by  the appropriate regulatory 
agency which may eventually be used in research involving human participation, 
clinical trials or human therapy.  The Bank may also supply ‘laboratory’ grade
subsets  of  ‘clinical’ grade cell lines  specifically for  non­clinical research  (see
section  6.5).  It will be important  therefore  for  accessors  to  specify in their
application  to  the Steering  Committee whether ‘laboratory’ or ‘clinical’ grade
stem cell lines are requested.  All stem cell lines available from the Bank in the
early phase will be ‘laboratory’ grade.
6.5  Clinical Grade Cell Lines for Laboratory Research Purposes 
The UK Stem Cell Bank may bank cultures of ‘clinical’ grade cell lines and supply 
a ‘laboratory’ grade component of those lines for research purposes that do not 
involve human participation under the terms of the research use licence. Such 
‘laboratory’ grade samples must not be developed for clinical use, and where the
intent for use of the cells in humans becomes a reality it is expected that the
researcher would obtain a sample of the ‘clinical’ grade stock of the respective
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 28 of 45
cell line. At such a time a separate clinical research or commercial licence would
need to be negotiated with the depositor of the line. 
It  is  possible that  a ‘laboratory’ grade cell line may  prove to  have unique
properties  that  justify its  development for use in  humans.  Any such  cell line
could in principle be re­derived to ‘clinical’ grade standard, though all cell lines 
intended  for  human  application  must  be procured,  tested,  processed,  stored,  distributed and imported/exported at an HTA licensed establishment under The
Human Tissue (Quality and Safety for Human Application) Regulations 2007.
6.6  Charges levied by the UK Stem Cell Bank 
The contract between the funders and the UK Stem Cell Bank makes provision 
for  a schedule of  charges  for  the provision  of  stem  cell lines  to  users.  The
Steering  Committee has  indicated that the charges  levied will be different  for 
academic researchers and commercial users of the Bank with commercial users 
expected to  pay the full economic  costs. It is  also  expected that  charging for 
services provided by the UK Stem Cell Bank will be in line with general principles 
applied by funding bodies and will allow for  recovery of some of the operating 
costs of the Bank over time. 
A schedule of  charges has been established by the Bank, but as of December
2009,  no  charges  other than  third party shipping  fees,  have been  levied  for 
research grade cell lines. This situation will be kept under review.  An up to date
schedule of charges (including shipment charges) as well as notification of any 
change to the Bank’s policy is available on the UK Stem Cell Bank website.
6.7  Liability 
NIBSC is responsible for all aspects of operation of the UK Stem Cell Bank and
for  any breaches  in  Bank operating  standards, procedures  or quality control
arrangements that  are not  in  compliance with  prevailing  practices.  However,  the MRC  is responsible for  the operation  of  the Steering  Committee,  the
application process and the decisions emanating from it. 
Stem cell lines stored in the UK Stem Cell Bank will be supplied to users without
warranty of  merchantability or fitness  for a particular purpose or any other
warranty, express or implied, and without any representation or warranty that 
they are free of extraneous agents or that the use or supply of the cell lines will
not infringe any patent, copyright, trademark or other right of any third party.  Therefore to the fullest extent permitted by Law, NIBSC will not accept liability
for any claims resulting from the research conducted on the stem cells and stem 
cell lines obtained from the Bank by a user.  Liability in such claims will be in 
accordance with the end user, user and depositor agreements for the relevant 
cell lines to the extent that users will indemnify NIBSC from any issues arising 
out of usage. 
Researchers  accessing  banked stem  cell lines  will be required to  agree a
Research  Use Licence or a Materials  Access  Agreement (where lines  were
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 29 of 45
deposited before March 2010 the depositor may require a Materials Use Licence
to be in place between depositor and accessor before their cells are released).
All depositors will be required to sign a Materials Deposition Agreement and will
be invited to disclose any known pre­existing  conditions of the cell lines being
deposited,  either at  the time  of  deposition,  or at  the first  time  that the pre­  existing condition becomes known to the depositor.  Depositors will be invited to 
indemnify NIBSC  against  issues  arising  from pre­existing  conditions  that  the
depositor could have reasonably foreseen.
7.  Accessing stem  cell lines  from  the  UK Stem  Cell  Bank and  using 
human embryonic stem cell lines from sources other than the UK
Stem Cell Bank
7.1  General principles 
7.1.1 Research projects in  which  human  embryonic  stem cell lines  may be
used 
The use of  embryonic stem  cells  in  research  was  debated at  length  in  both 
Houses  of  Parliament during  the passage of  the Human  Fertilisation  and
Embryology Act and its amendments in 1990, 2001 and 2008. Parliament made
it  clear that  human  embryonic  stem cell lines  should not  be used for trivial
purposes. 
The Steering Committee expects that human embryonic stem cell lines are only 
used by  bona fide research  groups  for  justified and valuable purposes  that 
reflect the requirements of the law relating to this area. This is: 
a)  research  which  increases  the knowledge about  the development of 
embryos  or has  the long term  goal of  helping to  increase knowledge
about serious diseases and their treatment (as set out in the 1990 Act 
as amended by the 2008 HFE Bill); 
b)  basic cell research which underpins these aims (as recommended in the
House of Lords Report 2002); 
c)  development of  cell based therapies  for clinical trials  in  respect  of 
serious human diseases. 
The Steering  Committee further recognises the importance of training  of  staff 
using  human embryonic stem  cell lines and therefore  the requirement on 
occasion to use stem cell lines for training purposes.
7.1.2 Peer Review 
It is normally expected that the research projects for which human embryonic 
stem  cell lines  are used have been  subjected to  independent  scientific  peer
review. However,  peer review  is  not  a pre­condition  for  Steering Committee
approval. For instance researchers should have the opportunity to access human 
embryonic  stem  cell lines  in  order to  generate preliminary  data  for grant 
applications,  while development projects in  the commercial sector are not 
usually subject to independent peer review.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 30 of 45
7.1.3 Research Ethics Committee approval 
Research  Ethics  Committees  are concerned that  patient  care and  diagnostic 
needs are not compromised by the diversion of material for  research purposes 
and protect the dignity, rights, safety and well being of all research participants. 
Research Ethics Committee approval must be obtained:
· as part of the application procedure for an HFEA research licence, · for research involving human tissues and
· for clinical trials of all stem cell derived therapeutic products.
The Steering Committee has agreed that Research Ethics Committee approval is 
not  required for  laboratory­based research  involving established human 
embryonic stem cell lines.
7.2. Using human embryonic stem cell lines from sources other than the UK
Stem Cell Bank 
The Steering Committee oversees all research involving human embryonic stem 
cell lines in the UK, whether these are accessed from the UK Stem Cell Bank or
from elsewhere. 
It is expected that the UK Stem Cell Bank will become the first port of call for 
researchers  wishing to  work  with  human embryonic  stem  cell lines.  The Bank 
will make available standardised,  quality controlled aliquots of  stem cell lines 
and  will allow researchers  to  work  with  well defined material so  that  direct 
comparisons can be made between studies. 
Although  the Steering  Committee expects  the UK  Stem  Cell Bank  to  be the
preferred source of  stem  cell lines,  it  is not  a requirement that  lines  are
exclusively accessed from the Bank. It is anticipated that there will be occasions 
when  researchers  wish to access  human embryonic  stem  cell lines from other
sources  (e.g. international cell lines not deposited in the Bank or cell lines not 
yet ready for distribution by the Bank). However, all researchers wishing to work 
with human embryonic stem cell lines within the UK (whether accessed from the
Bank,  from other sources  in  the UK  or oversees)  must  inform  the Steering 
Committee through the application procedure detailed in Section 8. 
The Steering  Committee needs  to  satisfy itself  that  the research  fulfils  the
criteria in section 7.1.1 and that the human embryonic stem cell lines have been 
ethically  sourced with  fully  informed and free donor consent.  Information  in 
relation  to  the ethical sourcing of  human embryonic  stem  cell lines  does  not 
need to be provided for human embryonic stem cell lines that a) were created in 
the UK  (as  consent procedures have been approved by the HFEA), or b) have
previously been approved by the Steering Committee for import or banking.
7.2.1 UK Stem Cell Lines Registry 
A register of Steering Committee approved human embryonic stem cell lines is 
available on the MRC web site (UK Stem Cell Lines Registry) – (See page 44 for 
full web link). This registry lists all the hES cell lines that have been approved by
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 31 of 45
the Steering  Committee for  use in  the UK, irrespective of  whether they  are
available through  the UK  Stem  Cell Bank  or not.  The UK  Stem  Cell Bank 
catalogue provides details on the subset of these lines that are deposited in the
UK Stem Cell Bank. 
UK  researchers  wishing  to transfer human  embryonic  stem  cell lines  to 
collaborators for a project that has been approved by the HFEA as part of the
licence for the derivation  of  human  ES cell lines do  not  need to  apply to the
Steering  Committee,  although subsequent  research uses for different projects 
would require approval.
7.3  Export of stem cell lines 
Researchers  wishing to  export  human  embryonic  stem  cell lines to  research 
establishments  outside the UK  should apply  to  the Steering Committee as 
outlined in Section 8. Research performed oversees should:
· fulfil the criteria in Section 7.1.1;
· comply with legislation in the UK and in the country where the research is 
performed and
· comply with this Code of Practice.
8.  Application Procedure 
The Steering Committee convenes four times per year to consider applications, 
with two of these meetings held virtually. Applications can be submitted at any
time and will be reviewed at the first available decision point. 
Applications that  fit  specific  criteria and therefore  do  not  raise any significant 
issues  can  be fast  tracked for  approval by  the secretariat  under delegated
authority. For this procedure to occur, all of the following criteria must be met:
· the cell line(s)  requested has  been  previously  approved by  the Steering 
Committee and is listed in the UK Stem Cell Lines Registry;
· the project has been subject to independent peer­review;
· the cell lines requested are only to be used for in vitro research;
· no  animals  are involved in  the research, except  for  teratoma assays  in 
small mammals with the appropriate Home Office licence;
· no hybrids/chimeras are involved; and
· the research will be undertaken only at site(s) in the UK 
Under  these circumstances  this  procedure  typically takes  2 weeks.  The
Secretariat can also amend existing approvals to incorporate additional hES cell
lines without referral to the Steering Committee, provided the lines in question 
are listed in the UK Stem Cell Registry. 
The UK  Stem  Cell Bank website has  an on­line application  process  for all
applications to the Steering Committee for: 
a)  the deposition of stem cell lines in the Bank,  b)  for access to stem cell lines from the Bank,
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 32 of 45
c)  to  import  human  embryonic  stem  cell lines  from sources  other than  the
Bank
d)  to  export  human  embryonic  stem  cell lines  from sources  other than  the
Bank and,  e)  to use human embryonic stem cell lines from sources other than the Bank.
9.  Donor Consent
9.1  Donor Consent for the use of embryos in research 
Free and informed  consent are key principles of the Human Tissue Act  (2004) 
and the HFE Act  (1990). Comprehensive information must be given in  a form 
that is readily accessible and allows a free and informed decision to be made by 
potential donors. All written information provided and consent forms have to be
approved by Local Ethics Committees and for  research involving  embryos also 
by  the HFEA.  The HFEA requires  that  the donor couple must  have given  in 
principle consent for the use of embryos in  research.  In addition, the Steering 
Committee has  in  collaboration  with the HFEA drawn  up a list  of  criteria that 
must  be addressed in information leaflets and  consent forms  provided by  IVF
clinics  for  the donation  of embryos  for  stem  cell research.  Donors  should be
approached as  early  as  possible,  usually before  ovary  stimulation,  to  allow
sufficient time to think issues over.
Information Leaflet and Consent Forms: 
Before patients give consent to donation of their embryos for use in  research 
projects to derive stem cell lines, they must be given oral information supported
by  relevant  written  material.  Details of the supporting  information that  HFEA
requires is available to donors and the written consent that must be provided
can be found at http://www.hfea.gov.uk/3468.html#guidanceSection5018
Further guidance on  consenting  arrangements  has  been  published by the UK 
national network of ‘human embryonic stem cell coordinators’ (HESCCO) ­ see
hESCCO:  development of  good practice models  for  human  ES cell derivation 
(Franklin et al Regen Med (2008) 3(1), 105­116).
9.2  Deriving stem cells from non­embryonic tissues 
9.2.1 Fetal Tissue
Fetal tissue is subject to the Human Tissue Act 2004. Researchers should ensure 
consent  is  obtained in  accordance with  the Human  Tissue Authority Code of 
Practice on Consent. All such work will need Research Ethics Committee (REC) 
approvals.
9.2.2 Tissues used to create human admixed embryos.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 33 of 45
The HFE Act 2008 contains provisions relating to consent for the use of gametes 
or cells to create human admixed embryos (see section 3.3). There are different 
requirements depending upon the source of the cells used and when they were
collected. 
i) Existing Holdings of Tissue (held before the commencement date of
the 2008 Act 3). These cells can be used without specific consent providing 
that they  were already  being  lawfully stored for  research  purposes  (which 
includes compliance with the Human Tissue Act 2004) and that the research 
is conducted under an HFEA licence and with appropriate REC approval. 
ii) Gametes or cells from children (under 18 years) 
Such material can be used to  create embryos for  research  subject to  strict 
safeguards and under licence from the HFEA. This provision was included to 
ensure  that  disorders  which  are lethal in  childhood are not  excluded  from 
embryo research, and in particular stem cell research. The requirements are
that: 
o the child suffers from, or is likely to develop, a serious disease, a serious 
physical or mental disability or any other serious medical condition, 
o the child is not competent to deal with the issue of consent to the use of 
its  cells  to  bring  about  the creation  in  vitro  of  an embryo  or human 
admixed embryo for use for the purposes of a project of research 4
, 
o any embryo or human admixed embryo to be created in vitro is to be
used for the purposes  of  a project  of research  which  is  intended  to 
increase knowledge about: 
a)  the disease,  disability or medical condition  that  the child suffers 
from as  above or any similar disease, disability or medical
condition, or
b)  the treatment of,  or care of  persons  affected by,  that  disease,  disability or medical condition  or any similar disease,  disability or
medical condition, 
o there are reasonable grounds for believing that research of comparable
effectiveness  cannot be carried out using cells from persons  who have
capacity to consent to such research. 
iii) Gametes or cells from adults who lack capacity to consent 
Provision is also made for material from adults who lack capacity to consent 
to  be used to  create embryos  or admixed embryos for research  purposes.  Such  research  must  be conducted under licence from the HFEA who  will
require assurance on  the points  below. Researchers  must  justify why the
research  cannot  be done using  cells from adults  with  capacity.  For many
diseases, even neurodegenerative disorders, there will be a group of patients 
who retain capacity from whom consent could be sought. The conditions for 
using material from those who cannot consent are:
3 This date was not available at time of publication  4 There is an assumption that children over 16 will have capacity to consent unless shown otherwise. In Scotland there
is legislation defining this – see MRC Guidance on research involving children for further details
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 34 of 45
o The patient  suffers  from,  or is  likely to  develop,  a serious  disease,  a
serious  physical or mental disability or any other serious  medical
condition, 
o They lack capacity to consent to the use of human cells to bring about 
the creation in vitro of an embryo or human admixed embryo for use
for the purposes of a project of research, 
o The person responsible under the licence has no reason to believe that 
the patient  had refused such  consent  at  a time  when  s/he had that 
capacity,  o it appears unlikely that the patient will at some time have that capacity,  o any embryo or human admixed embryo to be created in vitro is to be
used for  the purposes  of a project  of  research  which  is  intended  to 
increase knowledge about: 
a)  the disease, disability or medical condition mentioned above or any
similar disease, disability or medical condition, or
b)  the treatment of,  or care of  persons  affected by,  that  disease,  disability or medical condition  or any similar disease,  disability or
medical condition, 
o there are reasonable grounds for believing that research of comparable
effectiveness cannot be carried out if the only human cells that can be
used to bring about the creation in vitro of embryos or human admixed
embryos for use for the purposes of the project are the human cells of 
persons who have capacity to consent to this. 
In order to use such cells the researcher must identify a person engaged in 
caring  for  the patient  or interested in their welfare other than  in  a
professional capacity or for  remuneration,  and  who  is  prepared to  be
consulted about the proposed research.  If  the researcher cannot  identify
such a person the researcher must nominate a person who is prepared to be
consulted by the researcher and who has no connection with the project. The
person identified by the researcher must then be asked their opinion as to 
what the patient’s wishes and feelings about the use of their human cells for 
this  purpose would be likely  to  be if they  had capacity in  relation  to  the
matter. 
iv) Any other adult gametes or cells.  There must  be effective consent  in  place for the use of  any other cells to 
create, store or use an admixed embryo for research. This includes consent 
from donors of cells used directly to create an admixed embryo or donors of 
cells  used to  create an  embryo  from  which  an  admixed embryo  is  then 
derived.
9.2.3 Tissues used to create induced pluripotent stem cells 
The donation of tissue for the production of iPS cells must be in accordance with 
the requirements for tissue use for research. The consent provided by the donor
would need to be based on appropriate information about the intention of the
research and  creation of iPS  cells and will fall under the HT Act 2004 and the
HTA CoP on consent. All research involving human tissue should have Research
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 35 of 45
Ethics Committee (REC) approval but this is not a legal requirement. The Human 
Tissue Act 2004 applies to the UK; most of it is not applicable in Scotland which 
has separate Human Tissue (Scotland) Act 2006. Under the 2004 HT Act consent 
is required to store or use tissue with the following exceptions:
· tissue is from a living person and
· the tissue is anonymised (the researcher is not in possession, and 
not  likely to come into possession  of information  that  identifies 
the person from which it has come;) and
· the material is used for a specific research project approved by a 
recognised research ethics committee (e.g. NHS REC).
Tissue from children who lack capacity to consent can only be used with consent 
from a person with parental responsibility or, if no such person exists, someone
of a defined ‘qualifying  relationship’. Tissue from adults  who lack  capacity can 
only  be used subject  to  the requirements  of  the relevant  legislation.  These
requirements are broadly similar to those described above in section 9.1 and are
described in detail in MRC Guidance on Adults who Lack Capacity to Consent. 
Consent to use tissue to create iPS cells should be explicit about the nature of 
such  research.  Depending  on  the specific  project  researchers  should consider
ensuring specific consent is sought for areas that may be of particular interest to 
donors. These include:
· Potential commercial applications of cell lines,
· Genetic analysis of derived cells,
· Use in animal research, and
· Potential use in clinical transplantation.
10.  Derivation and use of Stem Cell Lines
10.1  Quality and safety standards in fundamental stem cell research 
Careful recording  of procedures and results  is  essential for the verification  of 
quality and integrity of research and can prove invaluable in resolving problems.
Those working with stem cell lines are expected to follow the general principles 
of Good Research Practice –  (See page 43 for full web link)  (Medical Research 
Council,  2000)  as  well as  best  practice for  cell culture procedures  (UK 
Coordinating Committee on Cancer Research,1999) – (See page 45 for full web
link)
10.2  Regulation  governing  the derivation  and  processing of clinical grade
stem cell lines 
All tissues  and  cells  intended  for  human application  are governed by  the EU 
Directive on  Setting  Standards  of  Quality and  Safety for  the Donation, 
Procurement,  Testing, Processing, Storage and  Distribution  of  Human  Tissues 
and Cells – transposed into the UK as the Human Tissue (Quality and Safety for 
Human Application)  regulation  2007.  The Directive covers  haematopoietic, 
umbilical cord and  bone marrow stem  cells,  reproductive cells  (eggs,  sperm),
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 36 of 45
fetal tissues and  cells and  adult and  embryonic  stem  cells.  The Directive does 
not cover research for purposes other than application to the human body, e.g. 
in vitro research or in animal models.  The aim  of the Directive is to lay down 
standards  of  quality in  order to  ensure  a high  level of protection  of  human 
health. 
A key principle of the EU Tissue Directive is the requirement of traceability of 
human tissues and cells from donor to recipient and vice versa in order to make
it possible to verify the compliance with quality and safety standards.  A cell line
developed de novo should be given  a unique and  unambiguous  identifying 
number that must preserve donor anonymity and be used in all procedures and 
publications. Researchers must ensure that it is possible to trace cryopreserved
stem  cell lines to the primary  cells  and the donated human tissue,  and  must 
ensure that an anonymised link can be put in place with the UK Stem Cell Bank
for the purposes of traceability
Stem  cells  and  stem  cell lines  intended  for human  use must  be derived and 
processed in  facilities  that  meet  the statutory  requirements  of  for the HTA
Directions, as a minimum, the stages of donation procurement and testing. The
requirements of good (pharmaceutical) manufacturing practice (GMP) should be
applied to  subsequent  activities  where the stem  cell and  stem  cell lines  in 
question  have a reasonable expectation  of  clinical utility.  The good practice
standards applicable under these circumstances  should be discussed with  the
HTA and GMP standards with the MHRA.
11.  Intellectual Property
11.1  Patentability of stem cells 
A notice setting out the UK Patent Office’s general practice on the patentability 
of inventions involving  human  stem  cells, published in  February 2009 may be
found at  http://www.ipo.gov.uk/pro­types/pro­patent/p­law/p­pn/p­pn­ 
stemcells­20090203.htm; this  states that each  case will be treated on its own 
merits in the light of all relevant  circumstances,  and stresses that the Office’s 
practice is subject to any future guidance from the UK courts.  In summary, the
Patent Office:
· will not grant patents for processes of obtaining stem cells from human 
embryos, · will not grant patents for human totipotent stem cells and
· will grant patents for inventions involving human pluripotent stem cells 
provided they satisfy the normal requirements for patentability.
11.2  Intellectual property generated by the UK Stem Cell Bank 
Subject to the approval of the Steering Committee, the staff of the UK Stem Cell
Bank will perform validation  and other tests  on  newly  deposited cell lines,  as 
well as  research  aimed  at  improving  Banking  processes  and  procedures  (e.g.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 37 of 45
relating to  storage,  reproducibility and  quality). Bank staff must  not  however,  conduct discovery research on Banked cell lines. 
During the period of MRC/BBSRC funding, any intellectual property arising from
research and development activities  carried out pursuant to the UK Stem Cell
Bank’s  operation  will be assigned to  MRC for the purposes  of  protection  and 
exploitation.  Net  revenues  generated from  exploitation  of  such  intellectual
property will be used solely for  supporting the operation of the UK Stem Cell
Bank. When an invention is dependent on a specific cell line, the owners of any
Banked stem  cell lines  used by  the UK  Stem  Cell Bank in  generating  such 
intellectual property,  shall have the royalty­free,  non­exclusive right,  without
the right  to  sub­licence,  to  such  intellectual property for use only  with  the
specific  cell line(s)  involved in  generating such  intellectual property.  In  the
event  the depositor wishes  to  use the intellectual property other than  solely 
with  the specific  stem  cell line then  a further licence or permission  will be
required from MRC.
Other than  as  set  out  above, the UK  Stem  Cell Bank will not take any direct 
interest in intellectual property embodied in deposited cell lines, and any legal
agreements involving the Bank will incorporate this principle.  Furthermore, the
UK  Stem  Cell Bank must  not  transfer,  transmit  or in  any other way  disclose
commercially confidential information about banked cell lines to any third party,  without prior permission from the depositor.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 38 of 45
12.  Glossary of terms and abbreviations
Accessor 
A researcher who withdraws a stem cell line from the UK Stem Cell Bank for use
in an approved research project. 
(Note:  applications to the Steering  Committee to  access a stem cell line from
the UK  Stem  Cell Bank must  be made by the host institution  rather than the
researcher).
Aliquot 
A defined amount of something e.g. cells.
Anonymisation 
The process of removing personal names and data from documents that would
reveal the identity of a person.
Archived 
Data or samples that have been preserved against future need.
Auditing 
A systematic,  independent  and  documented process  for  obtaining  evidence to 
determine the extent to which the Quality Management System  requirements 
are fulfilled.  (Note: Guidance on auditing quality and environmental management systems is 
provided in ISO 19011).
Autologous 
From the same individual.
BBSRC 
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
Blastocyst 
A hollow ball of  50­100  cells  reached after about  five days’ embryonic 
development just prior to implantation in the uterus.
Cell culture
Cells maintained in the laboratory by repeated passage in a sterile container.
Cell line
A well characterised cell culture,  normally  derived from a single cell, that  has 
been  demonstrated to be phenotypically  and  genotypically  consistent  over a
specified number of population doublings.
Clinical grade
A stem cell line appropriate for use in clinical research and application, i.e. it has 
been  derived under conditions  of  Good Manufacturing  Practice (GMP)  and  has 
passed rigorous safety testing to allow it to be used in studies involving human­ 
participation.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 39 of 45
Clinical trial 
A rigorously  controlled test  on  human  subjects  of  a new drug, or other
treatment, or a new invasive medical device.
Clonal 
Derived from a single cell.
Confidentiality 
Prevention of disclosure, other than to authorised individuals, of a participant’s 
identity.
Consent 
The voluntary consent given by a patient (or next of kin) to participate in a study 
(which may include donating tissue) after being informed of its purpose, method of 
treatment,  procedure for  assignment to treatment,  benefits  and  risks  associated
with participation, and required data collection procedures and schedule.
Curation 
Long term preservation of material or data, sometimes in an archive. Deposit 
A representative proportion of the cell line(s) derived from each embryo donated
altruistically that is made available for laboratory research use via the UK Stem 
Cell Bank. Depositor 
A researcher who deposits a stem cell line in the UK Stem Cell Bank
(Note:  applications to the Steering Committee to deposit a stem cell line in the
UK  Stem  Cell Bank must  be made by  the host  institution  rather than the
researcher). DH
Department of Health
Differentiation 
The process by which a cell becomes specialised to its final function.
Diploid 
Containing two sets of chromosomes.
Documented procedures 
Procedures that have been tested and optimised and written up in an operating 
manual for others to use. Donor 
A person who gifts embryos, cells or tissues.
Embryo
The first  stage in  the development of  a human  being, usually  the result  of 
fertilising an egg with a sperm; from the eighth week of fertilisation the embryo 
is referred to as a fetus.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 40 of 45
Embryonic germ cells 
Stem cells derived from primordial germ cells.
EMA
European Medicines Agency
Exogenous 
Originating outside of the body.
Exploitation 
The process of turning a patented invention into a commercial success.
Fetus 
A developing human from eight weeks after conception to birth.
Full economic costs
The all inclusive cost of an activity, i.e. producing a finished cell line. Gamete
A male sperm or female egg. Gene
A functional unit of heredity that is a segment of DNA located in a specific site
on a chromosome.  A gene directs the formation of an enzyme or other protein.
Genotype
The genetic constitution of an organism. This information is used as a "blueprint"
or set  of instructions  for building  and maintaining  the organism. The
instructions  are located within the DNA of  cells  and  are written  in a coded
language (the genetic  code);  they  are copied at  the time  of  cell division  or
reproduction and are passed from one generation to the next. GTAC
Gene Therapy Advisory Committee
HFEA
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority
HTA
Human Tissue Authority
Human Admixed Embryos 
Embryos  which  contain  both  human  and  animal material. The most  common 
type is  a cytoplasmic  hybrid embryo,  which  is  created by  adding the nucleus 
from a mature human cell (such as a skin cell) to an animal egg cell emptied of 
its nucleus, via a process called somatic cell nuclear transfer. Cytoplasmic hybrid
embryos are 99.9 per cent human.
Immortalized 
Made immortal.  An  immortalized cell line has  the ability to  grow through  an 
indefinite number of  divisions  in  culture,  normally  as  a result  of  genetic 
manipulation.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 41 of 45
Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPS cells), are a type of pluripotent stem cell
derived from a non­pluripotent cell, such as a differnetiated skin cell.
Informed consent 
The voluntary  consent given by a patient to participate in a study after being 
informed  of  its  purpose,  method of  treatment,  procedure  for assignment to 
treatment,  benefits  and  risks  associated with  participation,  and  required data 
collection procedures and schedule.
Intellectual Property 
Intellectual Property is any product of the human intellect that is unique, novel
and unobvious and has some value in the market place.  (Note: the employer of a researcher who derives a stem cell line is normally the
owner of any intellectual property relating to that cell line)
IVF 
In vitro fertilisation; the fertilisation of an egg by a sperm outside of the body.
Laboratory grade
A stem  cell line appropriate for  use in laboratory­based research  but  not  for 
clinical application,  i.e.  it  has  not  been  derived under conditions  of  Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP).
Liability 
The state of being legally obliged and responsible. Marginal costs
The amount by which production costs are increased as a result of generating 
one additional unit of output.
Mesenchymal stem cells 
Rare stem  cells  present  in  human  bone marrow that  have been  shown  to 
differentiate into a variety of different cell types in culture. MHRA
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency
MRC 
Medical Research Council
mRNA
Messenger ribonucleic acid is the molecule that carries the information from DNA
to acts as a template for protein synthesis.
Multipotent stem cells 
Stem  cells  that  have the potential to  differentiate into  a limited number of 
specific  cell types  in  order to  regenerate the tissue in  which  they  normally 
reside. Mycoplasma 
A type of bacterium which commonly infects cells grown in culture.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 42 of 45
Passage
Transfer of cells from one culture environment to another.
Patent 
A patent for an invention is granted by government to the inventor, giving the
inventor  the right  for  a limited period to stop others  from making, using  or
selling the invention  without the permission of the inventor. When a patent is 
granted, the invention becomes the property of the inventor, which  ­ like any
other form of property or business asset ­ can be bought, sold, rented or hired.
Phenotype
The "outward,  physical manifestation"  of  the organism;  i.e.  the sum  of  the
atoms, molecules,  macromolecules,  cells,  structures, metabolism, energy 
utilization,  tissues,  organs,  reflexes  and behaviours. The phenotype is  the
product of the genotype.
Pluripotent stem cell
A single pluripotent  stem  cell has the ability to give rise to types of  cells that 
develop from the three germ layers (mesoderm, endoderm and ectoderm) from
which all the cells in the body arise.  Pluripotent cells thus have the potential to 
develop into  every  cell type in  the human  body,  but  cannot  develop into  an 
embryo on their own.
Population doubling 
A measured doubling of cell numbers.
Primary cells 
Cells derived from an in vivo or ex vivo source.
Primordial Germ Cells 
Precursors  of  reproductive cells  within the embryo that  give rise to  eggs  and 
sperm.
Processing 
All operations  involved in  the preparation of  the stem cell line,  from receipt 
through preparation and packaging to its completion as a finished therapy.
Quality management systems 
The set  of  interrelated or interacting  elements  that  is  implemented by  an 
organisation to direct and control its activities in order to fulfil stated, implied or
obligatory needs or expectations. 
(Note: fundamental principles of Quality Management Systems are described in 
ISO 9000)
Reproductive cloning 
The implantation of an embryo produced by cell nucleus replacement / somatic 
cell nuclear transfer (therapeutic  cloning) into  the womb of a woman  for the
purposes of generating a pregnancy therefrom.  (Note:  this  procedure is illegal in the UK  and in many other countries in the
world.)
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 43 of 45
Requestor 
A researcher seeking approval from the Steering Committee to withdraw a stem 
cell line from the UK Stem Cell Bank for use in an approved research project.  (Note:  applications to the Steering Committee to access a stem  cell line from
the UK  Stem  Cell Bank must  be made by the host institution  rather than the
researcher.)
Risk 
Combination  of the probability of  occurrence of  harm  and the severity of that 
harm. Risk/benefit assessment 
Weighing  of the potential benefits of  a treatment  against  the harm  that  the
recipient might experience.
Somatic stem cells 
Stem cells derived from the adult body or fetus.
Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer (SCNT) 
The transfer of  an  adult  cell nucleus  into  an  egg that  has  had its  nucleus 
removed to asexually create an embryonic clone without the fusion of sperm and
egg.
Stakeholders 
Parties or individuals with an interest in an issue or question.
Stem cells 
Cells capable of self replication, proliferation and differentiation.
Stem Cell Bank 
A facility that is  responsible for  accessioning, processing, packaging, labelling,
storage and delivery of a finished stem cell line issued under its name.
Sterile
Condition of a product that is free from contaminating organisms.
Tissue engineering 
The application of principles and methods of engineering and life sciences to the
design,  specification  and  fabrication  of  cells,  biomaterials  or biomolecules  to 
restore or modify the biological functions of tissues.
Third party 
Someone other than the principals who are involved in a transaction
Totipotent stem cell
At two to three days after fertilisation an embryo consists of identical cells which 
are totipotent; that is to say, each could give rise to an embryo on its own. Such 
cells are totally unspecialised and have the capacity to differentiate into any of 
the cells  which  constitute the fetus  including  the placenta  and  membranes 
around the fetus.
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 44 of 45
Toxicology 
Study of the potential of materials to give rise to harm to health by virtue of 
their effect on biological systems.
Traceability 
Tracking an individual through their medical history.
Trademark 
A formally  registered symbol identifying  the manufacturer  or distributor  of  a
product.
Validation 
Establishment  of  documented evidence which  provides  a high  degree of 
assurance that  a planned process  will consistently perform according  to  the
intended specified outcomes.
Verification 
Confirmation by examination and provision of objective evidence that specified
requirements have been fulfilled.
13.  Full Website Links: 
3.1  The Human Tissue Act (2004):
http://www.legislation.hmso.gov.uk/acts/acts2004/20040030.htm
3.2  European Tissue and Cells Directive:
http://www.hta.gov.uk/legislationpoliciesandcodesofpractice/legislation/eutissue
andcellsdirectives.cfm
3.3. The Human Fertilisation and Embryology (HFE) Act (1990 and 2008) ­  http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts1990/Ukpga_19900037_en_1.htm
3.4  Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) Regulations 2004
http://www.uk­legislation.hmso.gov.uk/si/si2004/20041031.htm
3.5  EC Regulations on Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products 2007
http://www.mhra.gov.uk/Howweregulate/Advancedtherapymedicinalproducts/in 
dex.htm
3.6  The Role of the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee (GTAC) and the
Regulatory Route Map:
http://www.dh.gov.uk/ab/GTAC/index.htm
3.7  The UK Stem Cell Tool Kit 
http://www.sc­toolkit.ac.uk
4. The UK Stem Cell Bank:
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF HUMAN STEM CELL LINES
VERSION 5 (April 2010) Page 45 of 45
http://www.ukstemcellbank.co.uk/
5.1  Steering Committee:
http://www.mrc.ac.uk/Ourresearch/Ethicsresearchguidance/Stemcellbank/Steer
ingcommittee/index.htm
5.2  Bank Management Committee:
http://www.mrc.ac.uk/Ourresearch/Ethicsresearchguidance/Stemcellbank/Mana 
gementcommittee/index.htm
7.2  UK Stem Cell Lines Registry 
http://www.mrc.ac.uk/Ourresearch/Ethicsresearchguidance/Stemcellbank/Using 
thestemcellbank/MRC003079#P19_725
9.2  Donor Consent for the use of embryos in research 
http://www.hfea.gov.uk/3468.html#guidanceSection5018
10.1  Good Research Practice:
http://www.mrc.ac.uk/Ourresearch/Ethicsresearchguidance/Researchpractice/M
RC002539
UK Coordinating Committee on Cancer Research, 1999:
http://www.nature.com/bjc/journal/v82/n9/pdf/6691169a.pdf
10.2  EU Directive on  Setting  Standards  of Quality  and  Safety  for  the
Donation, Procurement, Testing, processing, Storage and Distribution of
Human Tissues and Cells 
http://eurlex.europa.eu/smartapi/cgi/sga_doc?smartapi!celexapi!prod!CELEXnumdoc&lg=
en&numdoc=32004L0023&model=guichett
11.1  Patentability of stem cells 
http://www.ipo.gov.uk/pro­types/pro­patent/p­law/p­pn/p­pn­stemcells­ 
20090203.htm