Visit the National Academies Press online and register for...
Instant access to free PDF downloads of titles from the
Distribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.
Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.
Request reprint permission for this book
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
10% off print titles
Custom notification of new releases in your field of interest
Special offers and discounts
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF ENGINEERING
INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE
NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL
This PDF is available from The National Academies Press at http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=12923
ISBN
978-0-309-15600-4
58 pages
7 x 10
PAPERBACK (2010)
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic
Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010
Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human
Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee; National
Research Council 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee
Board on Life Sciences
Division on Earth and Life Studies
Board on Health Sciences Policy
Institute of Medicine
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth Street, NW Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of
the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute
of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their
special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
This study was supported by The Ellison Medical Foundation. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for
the project.
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-15600-4
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-15600-9
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth
Street, NW, Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in
the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Suggested citation: National Research Council and Institute of Medicine. 2010. Final Report
of the National Academies’ Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and
2010 Amendments to the National Academies’ Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell
Research. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Cover: A cluster of motor neurons and neural fibers derived from human embryonic stem cells
in the lab of University of Wisconsin-Madison stem cell researcher and neuro­developmental
biologist Su-Chan Zhang. These motor neurons were developed from one of James Thomson’s
original human embryonic stem cell lines. Copyright for the photograph is held by the University of Wisconsin’s Board of Regents.
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth
Street, NW, Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in
the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2010 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance
of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the
charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it
to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is
president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National
Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. The National
Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs,
encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.
Dr. Charles Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to
secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of
policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility
given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the
federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research,
and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916
to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy’s purposes of
furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with
general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating
agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of
Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively,
of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
iv
HUMAN EMBRYONIC STEM CELL
RESEARCH ADVISORY COMMITTEE
R. ALTA CHARO (Co-chair), University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI1
RICHARD O. HYNES (Co-chair), Howard Hughes Medical Institute and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
ELI Y. ADASHI, Brown University, Providence, RI
BRIGID L.M. HOGAN, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC
MARCIA IMBRESCIA, Peartree Design, Lynnfield, MA
TERRY MAGNUSON, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
LINDA B. MILLER, Volunteer Trustees Foundation, Washington, DC
JONATHAN D. MORENO, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
PILAR N. OSSORIO, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
E. ALBERT REECE, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD
JOSHUA R. SANES, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
HAROLD T. SHAPIRO, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ
JOHN E. WAGNER, Jr., University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
Staff
ADAM P. FAGEN, Senior Program Officer, Board on Life Sciences
BRUCE M. ALTEVOGT, Senior Program Officer, Board on Health
Sciences Policy
FRANCES E. SHARPLES, Director, Board on Life Sciences
ANDREW M. POPE, Director, Board on Health Sciences Policy
AMANDA P. CLINE, Senior Program Assistant, Board on Life Sciences
1 Professor Charo was appointed as a senior policy advisor in the Office of the Commissioner of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on August 31, 2009. None of her
assigned tasks at FDA are related to the topics discussed in this report.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
v
BOARD ON LIFE SCIENCES
KEITH YAMAMOTO (Chair), University of California,
San Francisco, CA
ANN M. ARVIN, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
BONNIE L. BASSLER, Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Princeton
University, Princeton, NJ
VICKI L. CHANDLER, Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation,
Palo Alto, CA
SEAN EDDY, Janelia Farm Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Ashburn, VA
MARK D. FITZSIMMONS, John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation, Chicago, IL
DAVID R. FRANZ, Midwest Research Institute, Frederick, MD
LOUIS J. GROSS, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN
JO HANDELSMAN, Yale University, New Haven, CT
CATO T. LAURENCIN, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT
JONATHAN D. MORENO, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
ROBERT M. NEREM, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
CAMILLE PARMESAN, University of Texas, Austin, TX
MURIEL E. POSTON, Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, NY
ALISON G. POWER, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
BRUCE W. STILLMAN, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY
CYNTHIA WOLBERGER, Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
MARY WOOLLEY, Research!America, Alexandria, VA
Staff
FRANCES E. SHARPLES, Director
JO L. HUSBANDS, Scholar/Senior Project Director
KATHERINE BOWMAN, Senior Program Officer
ADAM P. FAGEN, Senior Program Officer
MARILEE K. SHELTON-DAVENPORT, Senior Program Officer
INDIA HOOK-BARNARD, Program Officer
ANNA FARRAR, Financial Associate
CARL-GUSTAV ANDERSON, Senior Program Assistant
AMANDA P. CLINE, Senior Program Assistant
AMANDA MAZZAWI, Program Assistant
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
vi
BOARD ON HEALTH SCIENCES POLICY
JAMES F. CHILDRESS (Chair), University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA
ELI Y. ADASHI, Brown University, Providence, RI
DONALD S. BURKE, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
C. THOMAS CASKEY, The University of Texas-Houston Health Science
Center, Houston, TX
DENNIS W. CHOI, Emory University, Atlanta, GA
KATHLEEN A. DRACUP, University of California, San Francisco, CA
FRED H. GAGE, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA
LINDA C. GIUDICE, University of California, San Francisco
LEWIS R. GOLDFRANK, New York University School of Medicine,
New York, NY
LAWRENCE O. GOSTIN, Georgetown University, Washington, DC
PAUL E. JARRIS, Association of State and Territorial Health Officials,
Arlington, VA
RICHARD C. LARSON, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA
ALAN I. LESHNER, American Association for the Advancement of
Science, Washington, DC
LINDA B. MILLER, Volunteer Trustees Foundation, Washington, DC
STEVEN M. PAUL, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN
REED V. TUCKSON, UnitedHealth Group, Minnetonka, MN
RAJEEV VENKAYYA, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA
KEITH WAILOO, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, NJ
CLYDE W. YANCY, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, TX
Staff
ANDREW M. POPE, Director
AMY K.H. PACKMAN, Administrative Assistant
DONNA RANDALL, Financial Officer
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
vii
Acknowledgments
The Committee acknowledges the input received from members of the
stem cell research and oversight communities and the speakers and participants in its meetings.
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for
their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the National Research Council’s Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical
comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as
sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards
for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review
comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity
of the deliberative process. We wish to thank the following individuals for
their review of this report:
George Q. Daley, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Children’s
Hospital Boston, and Harvard Medical School
Fred H. Gage, Salk Institute for Biological Studies
Lawrence S.B. Goldstein, Howard Hughes Medical Institute and
University of California, San Diego
Bernard Lo, University of California, San Francisco
Geoffrey Lomax, California Institute for Regenerative Medicine
Gail R. Martin, University of California, San Francisco
P. Pearl O’Rourke, Partners HealthCare System, Inc., and Harvard
Medical School
Steven Peckman, University of California, Los Angeles
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
viii Acknowledgments
Janet D. Rowley, University of Chicago
Huda Y. Zoghbi, Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Baylor
College of Medicine
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or
recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report before its
release. The review of this report was overseen by Floyd E. Bloom, The
Scripps Research Institute. Appointed by the National Research Council,
he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of
this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and
that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the
final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and
the institution.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
ix
Contents
Introduction 1
The 2010 National Academies’ Guidelines 4
The Future Role of the National Academies in Stem Cell Research
Oversight 5
2010 Amendments to the National Academies’ Guidelines for
Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research 7
APPENDIXES
A National Institutes of Health Guidelines for Research Using
Human Stem Cells 9
B Invited Participations at the August 7, 2009, Meeting of the
Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee 17
C National Academies’ Guidelines for Human Embryonic
Stem Cell Research, Amended as of May 2010 19
D Committee Member and Staff Biographies 37
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
1
Introduction
The 2005 National Academies’ Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem
Cell Research laid out standards for responsible and ethical conduct in a
controversial field of research that largely lacked federal funding or oversight. Those guidelines helped this important field of research to develop
within a framework of defensible, self-imposed rules. The result was greater
public confidence in the quality of the work. As certain states (California,
Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York, Maryland, and others) have moved
to regulate or fund this research, they have used the National Academies’
Guidelines as a template on which to build their own state regulations. The
international voluntary standards written by the International Society for
Stem Cell Research (ISSCR) also tracked closely the National Academies’
Guidelines.
Since their release, the National Academies’ Guidelines have been adopted wholly or in large part by most major research institutions in the
United States. This response included the creation of new Embryonic Stem
Cell Research Oversight (ESCRO) committees, use of detailed guidance on
informing gamete and embryo donors, and substantive limitations on the
range of materials that would be used and how those experiments would
be conducted. To assist the research community, the National Academies’
Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee has conducted
regional and other outreach meetings to help investigators and ESCRO
committee members to interpret and implement the Guidelines. The Advi-
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
2 Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
sory Committee also updated the Guidelines in 2007 and 2008 to reflect
the lessons learned by scientists and administrators around the country and
to reflect changes in the science of stem cell research. Finally, the Advisory
Committee organized or participated in several public workshops on key
areas of concern, such as the medical risks of oocyte donation and the next
steps toward translating bench science to clinical trials.
The inauguration of President Barack Obama in January 2009 led to a
marked shift in federal policies on stem cell research. On March 9, President
Obama issued Executive Order (EO) 13505, “Removing Barriers to Responsible Scientific Research Involving Human Stem Cells.” (Federal Register
Volume 74, Number 46, pp. 10667-10668). President Obama’s EO stated
that the “Secretary of Health and Human Services, through the Director of
NIH [National Institutes of Health], may support and conduct responsible,
scientifically worthy human stem cell research, including human embryonic
stem cell research, to the extent permitted by law.” While leaving untouched
the “Dickey-Wicker” amendment,1 which can only be changed by Congress
and which effectively prohibits the use of federal funds to derive new human embryonic stem (hES) cell lines, the EO did rescind prior Executive
branch policy. Specifically, the EO rescinded the previous policy that had
restricted federal funding for hES cell research to in vitro work on lines
derived before an earlier EO issued by President George W. Bush, by stating
“The Presidential statement of August 9, 2001, limiting Federal funding for
research involving human embryonic stem cells, shall have no further effect
as a statement of governmental policy.”
The EO issued by President Obama also called upon NIH to review
its own existing guidance as well as other widely recognized guidelines on
human stem cell research, including provisions establishing appropriate
safeguards, and to develop and issue new NIH guidance for such research
that is consistent with the EO’s call to support “responsible, scientifically
worthy” stem cell research. Without the restrictions placed upon it by the
previous administration, the NIH announced that it would begin a broader
1 The so-called “Dickey Wicker” amendment has been included in the annual federal appropriation for government-funded activities and has been interpreted to prevent the creation
of new human embryonic stem cell lines using federal funds. For example, Section 509 of the
Omnibus Appropriations Act 2009, enacted as Public Law 111-8) says:
None of the funds made available in this Act may be used for—(1) the creation of a human embryo or embryos for research purposes; or (2) research in which a human embryo or embryos are
destroyed, discarded, or knowingly subjected to risk of injury or death greater than that allowed
for research on fetuses in utero under 45 CFE 46.204(b) and section 498(b) of the Public Health
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 289g(b)).
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
2010 Amendments 3
program of funding extramural hES cell research according to its own new
guidelines on eligibility for funding.
The NIH Guidelines on Human Stem Cell Research were issued on July
7, 2009 (Appendix A). They establish mechanisms to determine the eligibility of hES cell lines for federal research funding based on the principles
that (1) responsible research with hES cells has the potential to improve our
understanding of human health and illness and discover new ways to prevent
and/or treat illness; and (2) individuals donating embryos for research purposes should do so freely, with voluntary and informed consent. Many of the
provisions defining informed consent in the NIH guidelines closely resemble
those of the National Academies, ISSCR, and others that predate the new
NIH requirements. Thus, the NIH guidelines address both the evaluation
of lines already in existence, derived under a variety of rules and guidelines,
as well as lines yet to be derived. NIH has established a Working Group of
the Advisory Committee to the Director of NIH to determine which hES
cell lines were derived under conditions that meet the requirements of the
NIH guidelines.2
It should be noted that the NIH guidelines prohibit the use of federal
funding for research using hES cell lines derived from any source other than
excess in vitro fertilization (IVF) embryos created for reproductive purposes.
Thus research on lines that may, in the future, be derived by somatic cell
nuclear transfer (SCNT), parthenogenesis, or from IVF embryos created specifically for research purposes is not currently eligible for federal funding. As
a consequence, they would not be subject to the NIH guidelines, including its
standards for ensuring voluntary, informed consent for donated materials.
The NIH has also established a new Registry of hES cell lines eligible
for NIH funding, containing those lines that its Working Group deems to
conform with the requirements of the guidelines.3 The NIH approved the
first list of hES cell lines for NIH funding on December 2, 2009, a second
set on December 14, 2009, and additional lines in the first half of 2010 and
indicated that it anticipated a continuing flow of approved hES cell lines to
be listed on the NIH Registry. Use of those lines with federal funding will
henceforth be governed by the NIH guidelines.
This letter report sets out an updated version of the National Academies’
Guidelines, one that takes into account the new, expanded role of the NIH
in overseeing hES cell research. It also identifies those avenues of continuing National Academies’ involvement deemed most valuable by the research
community and other significant stakeholders.
2 See <http://www.nih.gov/news/health/sep2009/od-21.htm> for information about the
Working Group.
3 The Registry is available at <http://grants.nih.gov/stem_cells/registry/current.htm>.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
4 Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
The 2010 National Academies’ Guidelines
Overall, there are three areas in which non-NIH guidelines will continue
to be the source of guidance for hES cell research.
•	 First, because the continuing effect of the Dickey-Wicker amendment
means that derivation of hES cell lines cannot be supported by federal
funds, such derivations will need continuing oversight outside the
NIH guidelines. And since the acceptability of the cell lines for use
in NIH-funded research hinges on the underlying conditions of nonfederally funded derivation, the NIH guidelines implicitly overlap
many of the National Academies’ Guidelines on derivation.
•	 Second, only hES cell lines derived from excess IVF embryos initially
produced for reproductive purposes are currently eligible for NIH
funding. Therefore, hES cell lines derived from other sources (e.g.,
from embryos produced by IVF for research purposes or by nuclear
transfer or other methods) will not be eligible for NIH funding and
not subject to the NIH guidelines; this work will continue to need
oversight under other guidelines.
•	 Third, because the NIH guidelines only briefly address limits on the
research uses to which embryonic stem cell lines may be put, other
guidelines will continue to be useful for a wider range of experiments
with chimeras than those currently identified by NIH.
To avoid complications, contradictions, and confusion, this Advisory
Committee has developed an updated version of the National Academies’
Guidelines that recognizes the new and increased influence of the NIH
guidelines, and which incorporates references to the NIH guidelines as appropriate in the text of the National Academies’ Guidelines. Where there
is complete overlap, the Advisory Committee recommends that the NIH
guidelines supersede its own. Where there are gaps or limitations in the NIH
guidelines, the Advisory Committee recommends continued adoption of its
own Guidelines.
The Advisory Committee also notes some areas in which there is tension
between NIH, National Academies, and other guidelines or state funding
rules, and identifies those for which some variation from National Academies’ Guidelines is to be expected.
The first concerns the issue of egg donation. Since the issuance of the
2008 Amendments to the National Academies’ Guidelines, the Ethics Com-
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
2010 Amendments 5
mittee of the State of New York’s Empire State Stem Cell Board adopted a
resolution allowing New York State-funded stem cell researchers to compensate women who donate their oocytes directly and solely to research for the
time, risk and burden involved in donating.4 Amounts of compensation are
to be comparable to those received by women in New York State for similar
donations for reproductive purposes. Compensation may not be based upon
number or quality of eggs, but should cover only time and burden. While this
Advisory Committee acknowledges that the circumstances surrounding the
issue of compensation to oocyte donors continues to evolve, it chose not to
change the National Academies’ Guidelines. Therefore, the Advisory Committee leaves intact the wording of Section 3.4(b), recognizing that states and
other entities may choose to set their own policies, as New York has done.
Second, the Advisory Committee notes that the requirement in the National Academies’ Guidelines for consent of all gamete donors (see Section
3.3) is not reflected in the new NIH guidelines. Further, a number of states
and research institutions have declined to adopt this rule, given the lack of
clear legal need for such consent from anonymous donors. The Advisory
Committee also notes that the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s)
recent tissue transplant rules require screening of gamete donors except in
cases involving sexually intimate partners. This suggests that stem cell lines
made with donor (i.e., screened) gametes may be marginally safer for tissue
transplants and may be more useable for FDA-regulated trials and therapies.
The Advisory Committee recognizes that this requirement may be widely
overlooked, and that the issue will be relevant only for a small percentage
of derivations. Nonetheless, the Advisory Committee still believes that the
practice of obtaining informed consent from all gamete donors, as well as
other relevant parties (e.g., intended parents), should continue to be followed
because it is the most cautious and respectful standard for donation.
The combination of the new NIH guidelines and those National Academies’ Guidelines remaining in effect will continue to represent a comprehensive and responsible approach as this research advances into the future.
The Future Role of the National Academies in Stem
Cell Research Oversight
In addition to reviewing the National Academies’ Guidelines, the Advisory Committee also considered the future role of the National Academies
4 The resolution is available at <http://stemcell.ny.gov/docs/Compensation_of_Gamete_Donors_resolution_of_Funding_Comm.pdf>
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
6 Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
in helping to guide responsible conduct in this field. The Advisory Committee dedicated most of its August 7, 2009, meeting to hear input from
stakeholders from the stem cell research community and from those who
have experience with the implementation of the National Academies’ Guidelines; a list of these individuals participating in the meeting may be found
in Appendix B.
One area of considerable discussion was the future of ESCRO committees, as most institutions that have been following the National Academies’
or other non-federal guidelines since 2005 have established such committees. Most participants in the August 7 meeting thought that ESCRO/SCRO
committees5 play valuable roles and function in such a way that their elimination could leave gaps not filled by other oversight bodies (e.g., Institutional
Review Boards, Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees, Institutional
Biosafety Committees). It was stated that ESCRO committees could continue
to be useful in maintaining deeper expertise on stem cell research than is necessarily provided by these other oversight bodies. ESCRO committees could
also be helpful in assisting research institutions in monitoring developments
in the field of stem cell research. In light of these comments, the Advisory
Committee agrees that the continued use of ESCRO committees is useful,
especially in circumstances where new hES cells are being derived. Even for
research with existing cell lines funded by NIH—and therefore subject to
NIH guidelines and the NIH hES cell registry—ESCRO committees could
also help institutions by providing needed expertise and training for the
members of their other committees.
The stakeholders at the August 2009 meeting also discussed whether
the National Academies should continue to play a role by maintaining an
activity, such as a roundtable, that would allow periodic meetings to discuss
knowledge and policy gaps, new problems, and contentious issues. It was
suggested that, in the future, the uses of stem cells, as opposed to derivation
of new lines, are likely to provide a larger share of any controversy or concern surrounding stem cell research. Stakeholders at the meeting suggested
that the National Academies are viewed as providing a neutral setting for
discussions that can help guide research institutions to make appropriate
decisions about research, particularly in areas that are outside the bounds of
NIH funding. Several guests stated that research using chimeras represents
one such area of potential concern, but that other issues (e.g., stem cellderived gametes) are also likely to emerge that may provoke controversy.
Other topics identified as being potentially important in the future for stem
5 Other guidelines called for the establishment of Stem Cell Research Oversight (SCRO)
committees whose mandate was not limited to embryonic stem cell research.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
2010 Amendments 7
cell research guidance included the relative merits of hES cells vs. induced
pluripotent stem cells and clinical trials and translational research.
Some of these topics may have little to do with the Guidelines themselves,
but might make excellent topics for future workshops or studies. In light of
these discussions, the Advisory Committee decided that:
•	 The Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee
should prepare this brief final report communicating to the stem
cell research community those elements of the National Academies’
Guidelines that should remain in effect and under what conditions.
•	 Following the completion of this task, the Advisory Committee
should disband.
The Advisory Committee also discussed the feedback from stakeholders
on future mechanisms for discussion of stem cell issues. Although government agencies such as the NIH, professional societies such as the ISSCR,
consortia such as the Interstate Alliance on Stem Cell Research,6 and meetings organized by many different organizations and institutions provide
opportunities for discussion, there does not seem to be an ongoing neutral
forum for productive discussion of stem cell issues. Participants at the committee’s August 2009 meeting mentioned that the National Academies and
the Advisory Committee had served this important convening function over
the last several years, and there was a need for a similar continuing activity.
Perhaps most needed is a forum that could bring together key stakeholders—including federal, state, academic, patient, and industry organizations
and institutions— for periodic meetings that would address topics of shared
interest and concern to the broader stem cell research, regenerative medicine,
and policy communities.
2010 Amendments to the National Academies’
Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Finally, the Advisory Committee presents here an amended version of
the National Academies’ Guidelines (Appendix C) delineating those sections
of the Guidelines that are superseded by the NIH rules for federally funded
research.
6 The Interstate Alliance (IASCR) is a voluntary body of states and affiliate countries and
organizations interested in increasing opportunities for interstate collaboration on stem cell
research. See <http://www.iascr.org/> for more information.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
9
Appendix A
National Institutes of Health Guidelines for
Research Using Human Stem Cells1
I. Scope of Guidelines
 These Guidelines apply to the expenditure of National Institutes of
Health (NIH) funds for research using human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) and certain uses of induced pluripotent stem cells (See Section
IV). The Guidelines implement Executive Order 13505.
 Long-standing HHS [Department of Health and Human Services] regulations for Protection of Human Subjects, 45 C.F.R. 46, Subpart A establish
safeguards for individuals who are the sources of many human tissues
used in research, including non-embryonic human adult stem cells and
human induced pluripotent stem cells. When research involving human
adult stem cells or induced pluripotent stem cells constitutes human
subject research, Institutional Review Board review may be required and
informed consent may need to be obtained per the requirements detailed
in 45 C.F.R. 46, Subpart A. Applicants should consult http://www.hhs.
gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/45cfr46.htm.
It is also important to note that the HHS regulation, Protection of Human
Subjects, 45 C.F.R. Part 46, Subpart A, may apply to certain research
using hESCs. This regulation applies, among other things, to research
involving individually identifiable private information about a living
1 Available at <http://stemcells.nih.gov/policy/2009guidelines.htm>.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
10 Appendix A
individual, 45 C.F.R. § 46.102(f). The HHS Office for Human Research
Protections (OHRP) considers biological material, such as cells derived
from human embryos, to be individually identifiable when they can be
linked to specific living individuals by the investigators either directly or
indirectly through coding systems. Thus, in certain circumstances, IRB
review may be required, in addition to compliance with these Guidelines.
Applicant institutions are urged to consult OHRP guidances at http://
www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/index.html#topics.
To ensure that the greatest number of responsibly derived hESCs are
eligible for research using NIH funding, these Guidelines are divided
into several sections, which apply specifically to embryos donated in
the U.S. and foreign countries, both before and on or after the effective
date of these Guidelines. Section II (A) and (B) describe the conditions
and review processes for determining hESC eligibility for NIH funds.
Further information on these review processes may be found at www.
NIH.gov. Sections IV and V describe research that is not eligible for
NIH funding.
These guidelines are based on the following principles:
1. Responsible research with hESCs has the potential to improve
our understanding of human health and illness and discover new
ways to prevent and/or treat illness.
2. Individuals donating embryos for research purposes should do
so freely, with voluntary and informed consent.
As directed by Executive Order 13505, the NIH shall review and update
these Guidelines periodically, as appropriate.
II. Eligibility of Human Embryonic Stem Cells for Research with NIH
Funding
For the purpose of these Guidelines, “human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs)” are cells that are derived from the inner cell mass of blastocyst
stage human embryos, are capable of dividing without differentiating for
a prolonged period in culture, and are known to develop into cells and 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix A 11
tissues of the three primary germ layers.2 Although hESCs are derived
from embryos, such stem cells are not themselves human embryos. All of
the processes and procedures for review of the eligibility of hESCs will
be centralized at the NIH as follows:
A. Applicant institutions proposing research using hESCs derived from
embryos donated in the U.S. on or after the effective date of these
Guidelines may use hESCs that are posted on the new NIH Registry
or they may establish eligibility for NIH funding by submitting an
assurance of compliance with Section II (A) of the Guidelines, along
with supporting information demonstrating compliance for administrative review by the NIH. For the purposes of this Section II (A),
hESCs should have been derived from human embryos:
1. that were created using in vitro fertilization for reproductive
purposes and were no longer needed for this purpose;
2. that were donated by individuals who sought reproductive
treatment (hereafter referred to as “donor(s)”) and who gave
voluntary written consent for the human embryos to be used
for research purposes; and
3. for which all of the following can be assured and documentation provided, such as consent forms, written policies, or other
documentation, provided:
 a. All options available in the health care facility where treatment was sought pertaining to the embryos no longer
needed for reproductive purposes were explained to the
individual(s) who sought reproductive treatment.
 b. No payments, cash or in kind, were offered for the donated
embryos.
 c. Policies and/or procedures were in place at the health care
facility where the embryos were donated that neither consenting nor refusing to donate embryos for research would
affect the quality of care provided to potential donor(s).
2 On February 23, 2010, NIH issued a request for public comment in the Federal Register
on changing this definition to the following:
For the Purpose of the Guidelines, ‘human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)’ are pluripotent cells
that are derived from early stage human embryos, up to and including the blastocyst stage, are
capable of dividing without differentiating for a prolonged period in culture, and are known to
develop into cells and tissues of the three primary germ layers.
As of the publication of this report, no revisions have been formally issued. Readers are
encouraged to consult <http://stemcells.nih.gov/> for the NIH current guidelines.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
12 Appendix A
 d. There was a clear separation between the prospective
donor(s)’s decision to create human embryos for reproductive purposes and the prospective donor(s)’s decision to donate human embryos for research purposes. Specifically:
 i. Decisions related to the creation of human embryos
for reproductive purposes should have been made free
from the influence of researchers proposing to derive
or utilize hESCs in research. The attending physician
responsible for reproductive clinical care and the researcher deriving and/or proposing to utilize hESCs
should not have been the same person unless separation was not practicable.
 ii. At the time of donation, consent for that donation
should have been obtained from the individual(s)
who had sought reproductive treatment. That is, even
if potential donor(s) had given prior indication of
their intent to donate to research any embryos that
remained after reproductive treatment, consent for
the donation for research purposes should have been
given at the time of the donation.
 iii. Donor(s) should have been informed that they retained the right to withdraw consent for the donation
of the embryo until the embryos were actually used
to derive embryonic stem cells or until information
which could link the identity of the donor(s) with the
embryo was no longer retained, if applicable.
 e. During the consent process, the donor(s) were informed of
the following:
 i. that the embryos would be used to derive hESCs for
research;
 ii. what would happen to the embryos in the derivation
of hESCs for research;
 iii. that hESCs derived from the embryos might be kept
for many years;
 iv. that the donation was made without any restriction or
direction regarding the individual(s) who may receive
medical benefit from the use of the hESCs, such as
who may be the recipients of cell transplants.;
 v. that the research was not intended to provide direct
medical benefit to the donor(s); 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix A 13
 vi. that the results of research using the hESCs may have
commercial potential, and that the donor(s) would
not receive financial or any other benefits from any
such commercial development;
 vii. whether information that could identify the donor(s)
would be available to researchers.
B. Applicant institutions proposing research using hESCs derived from
embryos donated in the U.S. before the effective date of these Guidelines may use hESCs that are posted on the new NIH Registry or they
may establish eligibility for NIH funding in one of two ways:
1. By complying with Section II (A) of the Guidelines; or
2. By submitting materials to a Working Group of the Advisory
Committee to the Director (ACD), which will make recommendations regarding eligibility for NIH funding to its parent
group, the ACD. The ACD will make recommendations to the
NIH Director, who will make final decisions about eligibility
for NIH funding.
 The materials submitted must demonstrate that the hESCs were
derived from human embryos: 1) that were created using in
vitro fertilization for reproductive purposes and were no longer
needed for this purpose; and 2) that were donated by donor(s)
who gave voluntary written consent for the human embryos to
be used for research purposes.
 The Working Group will review submitted materials, e.g.,
consent forms, written policies or other documentation, taking into account the principles articulated in Section II (A),
45 C.F.R. Part 46, Subpart A, and the following additional
points to consider. That is, during the informed consent process, including written or oral communications, whether the
donor(s) were: (1) informed of other available options pertaining to the use of the embryos; (2) offered any inducements for
the donation of the embryos; and (3) informed about what
would happen to the embryos after the donation for research.
C. For embryos donated outside the United States before the effective
date of these Guidelines, applicants may comply with either Section
II (A) or (B). For embryos donated outside of the United States on
or after the effective date of the Guidelines, applicants seeking to 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
14 Appendix A
determine eligibility for NIH research funding may submit an assurance that the hESCs fully comply with Section II (A) or submit an
assurance along with supporting information, that the alternative
procedural standards of the foreign country where the embryo was
donated provide protections at least equivalent to those provided by
Section II (A) of these Guidelines. These materials will be reviewed by
the NIH ACD Working Group, which will recommend to the ACD
whether such equivalence exists. Final decisions will be made by the
NIH Director.
D. NIH will establish a new Registry listing hESCs eligible for use in
NIH funded research. All hESCs that have been reviewed and deemed
eligible by the NIH in accordance with these Guidelines will be
posted on the new NIH Registry.
III. Use of NIH Funds
Prior to the use of NIH funds, funding recipients should provide assurances, when endorsing applications and progress reports submitted
to NIH for projects using hESCs, that the hESCs are listed on the NIH
registry.
IV. Research Using hESCs and/or Human Induced Pluripotent Stem
Cells That, Although the Cells May Come from Eligible Sources, Is
Nevertheless Ineligible for NIH Funding
This section governs research using hESCs and human induced pluripotent stem cells, i.e., human cells that are capable of dividing without
differentiating for a prolonged period in culture, and are known to develop into cells and tissues of the three primary germ layers. Although
the cells may come from eligible sources, the following uses of these cells
are nevertheless ineligible for NIH funding, as follows:
A. Research in which hESCs (even if derived from embryos donated
in accordance with these Guidelines) or human induced pluripotent
stem cells are introduced into non-human primate blastocysts.
B. Research involving the breeding of animals where the introduction
of hESCs (even if derived from embryos donated in accordance with
these Guidelines) or human induced pluripotent stem cells may contribute to the germ line. 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix A 15
V. Other Research Not Eligible for NIH Funding
A. NIH funding of the derivation of stem cells from human embryos
is prohibited by the annual appropriations ban on funding of human embryo research (Section 509, Omnibus Appropriations Act,
2009, Pub. L. 111-8, 3/11/09), otherwise known as the Dickey
Amendment.
B. Research using hESCs derived from other sources, including somatic
cell nuclear transfer, parthenogenesis, and/or IVF embryos created
for research purposes, is not eligible for NIH funding. 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
17
Appendix B
Invited Participants at the August 7, 2009,
Meeting of the Human Embryonic Stem Cell
Research Advisory Committee
George Q. Daley, Samuel E. Lux IV Chair in Hematology and Director,
Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Children’s Hospital Boston; Associate
Professor of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard
Medical School; Investigator, Howard Hughes Medical Institute; and Past
President, International Society for Stem Cell Research
Deborah A. Hursh, Senior Investigator, Division of Cellular and Gene
Therapies, Center for Biologics Research and Review, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration
Julie Kaneshiro, Team Leader, Policy, Office for Human Research Protections, Department of Health and Human Services
Story Landis, Director, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, National Institutes of Health (NIH), and Chair, NIH Stem Cell Task
Force
Bernard Lo, Professor of Medicine and Director of the Program in Medical
Ethics, University of California, San Francisco
Geoff Lomax, Senior Officer to the Standards Working Group, California
Institute for Regenerative Medicine
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
18 Appendix B
John McNeish, Executive Director, Pfizer Regenerative Medicine
P. Pearl O’Rourke, Director of Human Research Affairs, Partners HealthCare System, Boston; and Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical
School
Sean Tipton, Past-President, Coalition for the Advancement of Medical Research; and Director of Public Affairs, American Society for Reproductive
Medicine
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
19
Appendix C
National Academies’ Guidelines for Human
Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Amended as of May 20107
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Establishment of an Institutional Embryonic Stem Cell Research Oversight Committee
3.0 Procurement of Gametes, Morulae, Blastocysts or Cells for Generation
of hES Generation Cell Lines
4.0 Derivation of hES Cell Lines
5.0 Banking and Distribution of hES Cell Lines
6.0 Research Use of hES Cell Lines
7.0 International Collaboration
8.0 Conclusion
1.0 INTRODUCTION
In this chapter we collect all the recommendations made throughout the
report and translate them into a series of formal guidelines. These guidelines
focus on the derivation, procurement, banking, and use of human embryonic
stem (hES) cell lines and some uses of human pluripotent (hPS) cell lines.
They provide an oversight process that will help to ensure that research with
hES cells is conducted in a responsible and ethically sensitive manner and
in compliance with all regulatory requirements pertaining to biomedical research in general. The National Academies are issuing issues these guidelines
7 New or modified wording is indicated by underlining. Deleted wording is indicated by strikethrough.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
20 Appendix C
for the use of the scientific community, including researchers in university,
industry, or other private-sector research organizations who are conducting
such research with non-federal funding. Researchers conducting federallyfunded hES cell research should, however, note that the requirements of the
National Institutes of Health (NIH)—available at http://stemcells.nih.gov/
policy/2009guidelines.htm—supersede these National Academies’ Guidelines
for certain sections (as noted below).
1.1 What These Guidelines Cover
1.1(a) These guidelines cover all derivation of hES cell lines and all
research that uses hES cells derived from
 (i) blastocysts and/or morulae made for reproductive purposes
and later obtained for research from in vitro fertilization (IVF)
clinics,
 (ii) blastocysts and/or morulae made specifically for research using
IVF,
(iii) somatic cell nuclear transfer (NT) into oocytes or by parthenogensis or androgenesis.
1.1(b) Some of the concerns addressed in this report are common to
other types of human stem cell research; as such, certain of these Guidelines
should also apply to those other types of research. For example,
 (i) research that uses human adult stem cells,
 (ii) research that uses fetal stem cells or embryonic germ cells
derived from fetal tissue; such research is covered by federal statutory restrictions at 42 U.S.C. 289g-2(a) and federal regulations at 45 CFR 46.210,
 (iii) research using hPS cells derived from non-embryonic
sources, such as spermatogonial stem cells and “induced
pluripotent” stem cells derived from somatic cells by introduction of genes or otherwise (so-called iPS cells), as well
as other pluripotent cells yet to be developed; guidelines
for hPS cells are collected in Section 7 below.
Recommendations as to which guidelines apply to other hPS cells are
collected in a new Section 7 below. Institutions and investigators conducting
research with adult and fetal stem cells should also consider which individual
provisions of these guidelines are relevant to their research.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix C 21
1.1(c) Research supported by NIH funds using NIH-approved hES cell
lines is governed by NIH guidelines.
1.1(d) The guidelines do not cover research that uses nonhuman stem
cells.
1.2 Reproductive Uses of NT
These guidelines also do not apply to reproductive uses of nuclear transfer,
which are addressed in the 2002 report Scientific and Medical Aspects of
Human Reproductive Cloning, in which the National Academies recommended that “Human reproductive cloning should not now be practiced.
It is dangerous and likely to fail.” Although these guidelines do not specifically address human reproductive cloning, it continues to be the view of the
National Academies that research aimed at the reproductive cloning of a
human being should not be conducted at this time.
1.3 Categories of hES Cell Research
These guidelines specify categories of research that:
	 •	 Are permissible after currently mandated reviews and proper notification of the relevant research institution.
	 •	 Are permissible after additional review by an Embryonic Stem Cell
Research Oversight (ESCRO) committee, as described in Section 2.0
of the guidelines.
	 •	 Should not be conducted at this time.
Because of the sensitive nature of some aspects of hES cell research, these
guidelines in many instances set a higher standard than is required by laws or
regulations with which institutions and individuals already must comply.
1.3(a) hES Cell Research Permissible after Currently Mandated
Reviews
Purely in vitro hES cell research that uses previously derived hES cell lines
is permissible provided that the ESCRO committee or equivalent body
designated by the investigator’s institution (see Section 2.0) receives documentation of the provenance of the cell lines including (i) documentation of
the use of an acceptable informed consent process that was approved by an
Institutional Review Board (IRB) or foreign equivalent for their derivation
(consistent with Section 3.6) and (ii) documentation of compliance with any 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
22 Appendix C
additional required review by an Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC), Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC), or other institutionally mandated review, if necessary. To determine whether the proposed
research meets the requirements of this section, the ESCRO committee may
choose to conduct an “expedited review” of such research proposals. In this
context, expedited review means that the ESCRO committee chair or others
designated by the committee chair act on behalf of the committee to determine that the hES cells have been acceptably derived (see Section 1.5) and
report to the entire committee. All hES cell lines listed on the NIH Registry
of approved lines are acceptable for use in research, subject to any restrictions imposed by NIH. Certain other lines may be considered acceptable for
research using non-federal funds (see 1.5 below).
1.3(b) hES Cell Research Permissible Only After Additional Review
and Approval
 (i) Generation of new lines of hES cells by whatever means.
 (ii) Research involving the introduction of hES cells into nonhuman animals other than humans or primates8 at any
stage of embryonic, fetal, or postnatal development. Particular attention should be paid to at least three factors: the
extent to which the implanted cells colonize and integrate
into the animal tissue; the degree of differentiation of the
implanted cells; and the possible effects of the implanted
cells on the function of the animal tissue.
 (iii) Research involving the introduction of hES cell into nonhuman primates at any stage of fetal or postnatal development. Particular attention should be paid to at least three
factors: the extent to which the implanted cells colonize
and integrate into the animal tissue; the degree of differentiation of the implanted cells; and the possible effects of
the implanted cells on the function of the animal tissue.
 (iv) Research in which the identity of the donors of blastocysts,
morulae, gametes, or somatic cells from which the hES
cells were derived is readily ascertainable or might become
known to the investigator.
8 “Nonhuman animals” has been changed to “animals other than human or primates”
as the Guidelines do not permit the introduction of hES cells into humans or nonhuman
primates (Section 1.3(c)(ii)).
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix C 23
1.3(c) hES Cell Research That Should Not Be Permitted At This
Time
The following types of research should not be conducted at this time:
 (i) Research involving in vitro culture of any intact human embryo, regardless of derivation method, for
longer than 14 days or until formation of the primitive streak begins, whichever occurs first.
 (ii) Research in which hES cells are introduced into nonhuman primate blastocysts or in which any embryonic
stem cells are introduced into human blastocysts.
In addition:
 (iii) No animal into which hES cells have been introduced such that they could contribute to the germ
line should be allowed to breed.
1.4 Obligations of Investigators and Institutions
All scientific investigators and their institutions, regardless of their field,
bear the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that they conduct themselves
in accordance with professional standards and with integrity. In particular,
people whose research involves hES cells should work closely with oversight
bodies, demonstrate respect for the autonomy and privacy of those who
donate gametes, morulae, blastocysts, or somatic cells and be sensitive to
public concerns about research that involves human embryos.
1.5 Use of NIH-approved hES cell lines
1.5(a) It is acceptable to use hES cell lines that were approved in August
2001 for use in U.S. federally funded research.
1.5(b) ESCRO committees should include on their registry a list of NIHapproved cell lines that have been used at their institution in accord with the
requirement in section 2.0 of the Guidelines.
1.5(c) Presence on the list of NIH-approved cell lines constitutes adequate documentation of provenance, as per Section 6.1 of the Guidelines.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
24 Appendix C
1.5 Acceptability of research using hES cell lines imported from other
institutions or jurisdictions
1.5(a) Before approving use of hES and hPS cell lines imported from
other institutions or jurisdictions, ESCRO committees should consider
whether such cell lines have been “acceptably derived.”
1.5(b) “Acceptably derived” means that the cell lines were derived
from gametes or embryos for which
 (i) the donation protocol was reviewed and approved by an
IRB or, in the case of donations taking place outside the
United States, a substantially equivalent oversight body;
 (ii) consent to donate was voluntary and informed;
 (iii) donation was made with reimbursement policies consistent
with these Guidelines; and
 (iv) donation and derivation complied with the extant legal
requirements of the relevant jurisdiction.
1.5(c) ESCRO committees should include on their registry a list of
cell lines that have been imported from other institutions or jurisdictions
and information on the specific guidelines, regulations, or statutes under
which the derivation of the imported cell lines was conducted. This is in
accord with the requirement in section 2.0 of the Guidelines that calls for
ESCRO committees to maintain registries listing the cell lines in use at their
institutions.
2.0 ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INSTITUTIONAL EMBRYONIC
STEM CELL RESEARCH OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE
To provide oversight of all issues related to derivation and use of hES cell
lines and to facilitate education of investigators involved in hES cell research, each many institutions currently require that research should have
activities involving hES cells should be overseen by an Embryonic Stem Cell
Research Oversight (ESCRO) committee. Although not required under the
NIH Guidelines on Human Stem Cell Research, institutions conducting federally funded stem cell research are nevertheless likely to decide to maintain
their ESCRO committees and use them for consultation, training, and any
other functions appropriate to assist the institution and its researchers in
evaluating and managing hES cell research. Institutions that conduct both
federally funded and non-federally funded hES cell research, particularly if 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix C 25
this research involves the derivation of new cell lines, should maintain and
use their ESCRO committees as they did prior to July 7, 2009. An ESCRO
committee could be internal to a single institution or established jointly with
one or more other institutions. Alternatively, an institution may have its
proposals reviewed by an ESCRO committee of another institution, or by
an independent ESCRO committee. An ESCRO committee should include
independent representatives of the lay public as well as persons with expertise in developmental biology, stem cell research, molecular biology, assisted
reproduction, and ethical and legal issues in hES cell research. It must have
suitable scientific, medical, and ethical expertise to conduct its own review
and should have the resources needed to coordinate the management of
the various other reviews required for a particular protocol. A pre-existing
committee could serve the functions of the ESCRO committee provided
that it has the expertise recommended here and representation to perform
the various roles described in this report. For example, an institution might
elect to constitute an ESCRO committee from among some members of an
IRB. But the ESCRO committee should not be a subcommittee of the IRB, as
its responsibilities extend beyond human subject protections. Furthermore,
much hES cell research does not require IRB review. The ESCRO committee
should would:
(a) Provide oversight over all issues related to derivation and use of hES
cell lines.
(b) Provide oversight over issues related to the use of hES cell lines not
otherwise covered by NIH guidelines.
(bc) Review and approve the scientific merit of research protocols.
(cd) Review compliance of all in-house hES cell research with all relevant
regulations and these guidelines.
(de) Maintain registries of hES cell research conducted at the institution
and hES cell lines derived or imported by institutional investigators.
An institution conducting stem cell research should make information from the registries (including, but not necessarily limited to,
project abstracts and source of funding) available to the public and
the media through the institution’s Web site.
(ef) Facilitate education of investigators involved in hES cell research.
An institution that maintains its own ESCRO committee should also conduct
periodic audits of the committee to verify that it is carrying out its responsibilities appropriately. Auditable records include documentation of decisions
regarding the acceptability of research proposals and verification that cell 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
26 Appendix C
lines in use at the institution were acceptably derived (see Section 1.5). Institutions should make the results of these audits available to the public.
An institution that uses an external ESCRO committee should nevertheless
ensure that the registry and educational functions of an internal ESCRO
committee are carried out by the external ESCRO committee on its behalf
or internally by other administrative units. Institutions that use external
ESCRO committees are also responsible for ensuring that these committees
are likewise carrying out their responsibilities appropriately.
2.1 For projects that involve more than one institution, review of the scientific merit, justification, and compliance status of the research may be carried
out by a single ESCRO committee if all participating institutions agree to
accept the results of the review.
3.0 PROCUREMENT OF GAMETES, MORULAE, BLASTOCYSTS
OR CELLS FOR GENERATION OF hES CELL LINES
GENERATION
3.1 An IRB, as described in federal regulations at 45 CFR 46.107, should
review all new procurement of all gametes, morulae, blastocysts, or somatic
cells for the purpose of generating new hES or hPS cell lines. This includes
the procurement of blastocysts and/or morulae in excess of clinical need
from infertility clinics, blastocysts made through IVF specifically for research
purposes, and oocytes, sperm, and somatic cells donated for development of
hES cell lines derived through NT or by parthenogenesis or androgenesis;
and hPS cells derived by any means that require human subjects review.
3.2 Consent for donation should be obtained from each donor at the time of
donation. Even people who have given prior indication of their intent to donate to research any blastocysts and/or morulae that remain after clinical care
should nonetheless give informed consent at the time of donation. Donors
should be informed that they retain the right to withdraw consent until the
blastocysts and/or morulae are actually used in cell line derivation.
3.3 When donor gametes have been used in the IVF process, resulting blastocysts and/or morulae may not be used for research without consent of
all gamete donors. Written agreement at the time of gamete donation that
one potential use of the blastocysts and/or morulae is embryo research will
constitute sufficient consent.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix C 27
3.4 Payment and Reimbursement
3.4 (a) No payments, cash or in-kind, may be provided for donating
blastocysts and/or morulae in excess of clinical need for research purposes.
People who elect to donate stored blastocysts and/or morulae for research
should not be reimbursed for the costs of storage prior to the decision to
donate.
3.4(b) Women who undergo hormonal induction to generate oocytes
specifically for research purposes (such as for NT) should be reimbursed
only for direct expenses incurred as a result of the procedure, as determined
by an IRB. Direct expenses may include costs associated with travel, housing, child care, medical care, health insurance, and actual lost wages. No
payments beyond reimbursements, cash or in-kind, should be provided for
donating oocytes for research purposes. Similarly, no payments beyond reimbursements should be made for donations of sperm for research purposes
or of somatic cells for use in NT.
3.5 To facilitate autonomous choice, decisions related to the creation of
embryos for infertility treatment should be free of the influence of investigators who propose to derive or use hES cells in research. Whenever it is
practicable, the attending physician responsible for the infertility treatment
and the investigator deriving or proposing to use hES cells should not be
the same person.
3.6 In the context of donation of gametes, morulae, blastocysts, or somatic
cells for hES cell research or for hPS cell research that requires human subjects review, the informed consent process, should, at a minimum, provide
the following information.9
(a) A statement that the blastocysts, gametes, morulae, blastocysts, or
somatic cells will be used to derive hES or hPS cells for research that
may include research on human transplantation.
(b) A statement that the donation is made without any restriction or
direction regarding who may be the recipient of transplants of the
cells derived, except in the case of autologous donation.
(c) A statement as to whether the identities of the donors will be readily
ascertainable to those who derive or work with the resulting hES or
hPS cell lines.
9 To be eligible for use in federally-funded research, the NIH guidelines specify specific elements for informed consent that may differ from the elements listed below. 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
28 Appendix C
(d) If the identities of the donors are retained (even if coded), a statement
as to whether donors wish to be contacted in the future to receive
information obtained through studies of the cell lines.
(e) An assurance that participants in research projects will follow applicable and appropriate best practices for donation, procurement,
culture, and storage of cells and tissues to ensure, in particular, the
traceability of stem cells. (Traceable information, however, must be
secured to ensure confidentiality.)
(f) A statement that derived hES or hPS cells and/or cell lines might be
kept for many years.
(g) A statement that the hES or hPS cells and/or cell lines might be used
in research involving genetic manipulation of the cells or the mixing
of human and nonhuman cells in animal models.
(h) Disclosure of the possibility that the results of study of the hES or
hPS cells may have commercial potential and a statement that the
donor will not receive financial or any other benefits from any future
commercial development.
(i) A statement that the research is not intended to provide direct medical
benefit to the donor(s) except in the case of autologous donation.
(j) A statement that embryos will be destroyed in the process of deriving
hES cells.
(k) A statement that neither consenting nor refusing to donate embryos
for research will affect the quality of any future care provided to
potential donors.
(l) A statement of the risks involved to the donor.
In addition, donors could be offered the option of agreeing to some forms
of hES cell research but not others. For example, donors might agree to
have their materials used for deriving new hES cell lines but might not want
their materials used, for example, for NT. The consent process should fully
explore whether donors have objections to any specific forms of research to
ensure that their wishes are honored. Investigators and stem cell banks are,
of course, free to choose which cell lines to accept, and are not obligated to
accept cell lines for which maintaining information about specific research
use prohibitions would be unduly burdensome.
New derivations of stem cell lines from banked tissues obtained prior to
the adoption of these guidelines are permissible provided that the original
donations were made in accordance with the legal requirements in force at
the place and time of donation. This includes gametes, morulae, blastocysts,
adult stem cells, somatic cells, or other tissue. In the event that these banked 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix C 29
tissues retain identifiers linked to living individuals, human subjects protections may apply.
3.7 Clinical personnel who have a conscientious objection to hES cell research should not be required to participate in providing donor information
or securing donor consent for research use of gametes, morulae, or blastocysts. That privilege should not extend to the care of a donor or recipient.
3.8 Researchers may not ask members of the infertility treatment team to
generate more oocytes than necessary for the optimal chance of reproductive
success. An infertility clinic or other third party responsible for obtaining
consent or collecting materials should not be able to pay for or be paid for
the material obtained (except for specifically defined cost-based reimbursements and payments for professional services).
4.0 DERIVATION OF hES CELL LINES
4.1 Requests to the ESCRO committee for permission to attempt derivation
of new hES cell lines from donated embryos, morulae, or blastocysts must
include evidence of IRB approval of the procurement process (see Section
3.0 above).
4.2 The scientific rationale for the need to generate new hES cell lines, by
whatever means, must be clearly presented, and the basis for the numbers
of embryos, morulae, and blastocysts needed should be justified.
4.3 Research teams should demonstrate appropriate expertise or training in
derivation or culture of either human or nonhuman ES cells before permission to derive new lines is given.
4.4 When NT experiments involving either human or nonhuman oocytes
are proposed as a route to generation of hES cells, the protocol must have a
strong scientific rationale. Proposals that include studies to find alternatives
to donated oocytes in this research should be encouraged.
4.5 Neither blastocysts or morulae made using NT of human nuclei (whether
produced with human or nonhuman oocytes) nor parthenogenetic or androgenetic human embryos may be transferred to a human or nonhuman
uterus or cultured as intact embryos in vitro for longer than 14 days or until
formation of the primitive streak, whichever occurs first.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
30 Appendix C
4.6 Investigators must document how they will characterize, validate, store,
and distribute any new hES cell lines and how they will maintain the confidentiality of any coded or identifiable information associated with the lines
(see Section 5.0 below). Investigators are encouraged to apply the same
procedures and standards for characterization, validation, storage, and distribution to hPS cell lines.
5.0 BANKING AND DISTRIBUTION OF hES CELL LINES
There are several models for the banking of human biological materials,
including hES cells. The most relevant is the U.K. Stem Cell Bank. The
guidelines developed by this and other groups generally adhere to key ethical principles that focus on the need for consent of donors and a system for
monitoring adherence to ethical, legal, and scientific requirements. As hES
cell research advances, it will be increasingly important for institutions that
are obtaining, storing, and using cell lines to have confidence in the value of
stored cells—that is, that they were obtained ethically and with the informed
consent of donors, that they are well characterized and screened for safety,
and that the conditions under which they are maintained and stored meet the
highest scientific standards. Institutions engaged in hES research should seek
mechanisms for establishing central repositories for hES cell lines—through
partnerships or augmentation of existing quality research cell line repositories and should adhere to high ethical, legal, and scientific standards. At a
minimum, an institutional registry of stem cell lines should be maintained.
Institutions are encouraged to consider the use of the same procedures for
banking and distribution of hPS cell lines.
5.1 Institutions that are banking or plan to bank hES cell lines should establish uniform guidelines to ensure that donors of material give informed
consent through a process approved by an IRB and that meticulous records
are maintained about all aspects of cell culture. Uniform tracking systems
and common guidelines for distribution of cells should be established.
5.2 Any facility engaged in obtaining and storing hES cell lines should consider the following standards:
(a) Creation of a committee for policy and oversight purposes and creation
of clear and standardized protocols for banking and withdrawals.
(b) Documentation requirements for investigators and sites that deposit
cell lines, including
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix C 31
(i) A copy of the donor consent form.
(ii) Proof of Institutional Review Board approval of the procurement process.
(iii) Available medical information on the donors, including results
of infectious-disease screening.
(iv) Available clinical, observational, or diagnostic information
about the donor(s).
(v) Critical information about culture conditions (such as media,
cell passage, and safety information).
(vi) Available cell line characterization (such as karyotype and genetic markers).
A repository has the right of refusal if prior culture conditions or other
items do not meet its standards.
(c) A secure system for protecting the privacy of donors when materials
retain codes or identifiable information, including but not limited
to
(i) A schema for maintaining confidentiality (such as a coding
system).
(ii) A system for a secure audit trail from primary cell lines to those
submitted to the repository.
(iii) A policy governing whether and how to deliver clinically significant information back to donors.
(d) The following standard practices:
(i) Assignment of a unique identifier to each sample.
(ii) A process for characterizing cell lines.
(iii) A process for expanding, maintaining, and storing cell lines.
(iv) A system for quality assurance and control.
(v) A website that contains scientific descriptions and data related
to the cell lines available.
(vi) A procedure for reviewing applications for cell lines.
(vii) A process for tracking disbursed cell lines and recording their
status when shipped (such as number of passages).
(viii) A system for auditing compliance.
(ix) A schedule of charges.
(x) A statement of intellectual property policies.
(xi) When appropriate, creation of a clear Material Transfer Agreement or user agreement.
(xii) A liability statement.
(xiii)A system for disposal of material.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
32 Appendix C
(e) Clear criteria for distribution of cell lines, including but not limited
to evidence of approval of the research by an embryonic stem cell
research oversight committee or equivalent body at the recipient
institution.
6.0 RESEARCH USE OF hES CELL LINES
Once hES cell lines have been derived, investigators and institutions, through
ESCRO committees and other relevant committees (such as an IACUC, an
IBC, or a radiation safety committee) should monitor their use in research.
6.1 Institutions should require documentation of the provenance of all hES
cell lines, whether the cells were imported into the institution or generated locally. The institution should obtain evidence of IRB-approval of the
procurement process and of adherence to basic ethical and legal principles
of procurement as described in Section 1.3(a) and 1.5. In the case of lines
imported from another institution, documentation that these criteria were
met at the time of derivation will suffice. Listing on the NIH Registry will
be sufficient evidence of acceptability of hES cell lines.
6.2 In vitro experiments involving the use of already derived and coded
hES cell lines will not need review beyond the review described in Sections
1.3(a) and 6.1.
6.3 Each institution should maintain a registry of its investigators who are
conducting hES cell research and ensure that all registered users are kept
up to date with changes in guidelines and regulations regarding the use of
hES cells.
6.4 All protocols involving the combination of hES cells with nonhuman
embryos, fetuses, or adult vertebrate animals must be submitted to the local
IACUC for review of animal welfare issues and to the ESCRO committee for
consideration of the consequences of the human contributions to the resulting chimeras. (See also Section 1.3(c)(iii) concerning breeding of chimeras.)
6.5 Transplantation of differentiated derivatives of hES cells or even hES
cells themselves into adult animals will not require extensive ESCRO committee review. If there is a possibility that the human cells could contribute
in a major organized way to the brain of the recipient animal, however, 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix C 33
the scientific justification for the experiments must be strong, and proof of
principle using nonhuman (preferably primate) cells, is desirable.
6.6 Experiments in which hES cells, their derivatives, or other pluripotent
cells are introduced into nonhuman fetuses and allowed to develop into adult
chimeras need more careful consideration because the extent of human contribution to the resulting animal may be higher. Consideration of any major
functional contributions to the brain should be a main focus of review. (See
also Section 1.3(c)(iii) concerning breeding of chimeras.)
6.7 Introduction of hES cells into nonhuman mammalian blastocysts should
be considered only under circumstances in which no other experiment can
provide the information needed. (See also Sections 1.3(c)(ii) and 1.3(c)(iii)
concerning restrictions on breeding of chimeras and production of chimeras
with nonhuman primate blastocysts.)
6.8 Research use of existing hES cells does not require IRB review unless
the research involves introduction of the hES cells or their derivatives into
patients or the possibility that the identity of the donors of the blastocysts,
gametes, morulae, blastocysts, or somatic cells is readily ascertainable or
might become known to the investigator.
7.0 Recommendations for Research Use of
non-embryo-derived human pluripotent stem
cells (hPS CELLS)
7.1 Derivation
Because non-embryo-derived hPS cells are derived from human material,
their derivation is may be covered by existing IRB regulations concerning
review and informed consent, depending on the source of the tissue used.
No ESCRO committee review is necessary, although the IRB may always
seek the advice of an ESCRO committee if this seems desirable. Where appropriate, tThe IRB review should consider proper consent for use of the
derived hPS cells. Some of the recommendations for informed consent that
apply to hES cells also apply to hPS cells (see Section 3.6), including informed
consent to genetic manipulation of resulting pluripotent stem cells and their
use for transplantation into animals and humans and potentially in future
commercial development.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
34 Appendix C
7.2 Use in in Vitro Experiments
Use of hPS cells in purely in vitro experiments need not be subject to any
review beyond that necessary for any human cell line except that any experiments designed or expected to yield gametes (oocytes or sperm) should be
subject to ESCRO committee review.
7.3 Use in Experiments Involving Transplantation of hPS Cells into Animals
at any Stage of Development or Maturity
7.3(a) Research involving transplantation of pluripotent human cells
derived from nonembryonic sources into nonhuman animals other than
humans or primates at any stage of embryonic, fetal, or postnatal development should be reviewed by ESCRO committees and IACUCs, as are similar
experiments that use hES cells.
7.3(b) ESCRO committees should review the provenance of the hPS cells
as they review the provenance of hES cells (see section 1.5) to ensure that the
cell lines were derived according to ethical procedures of informed consent
as monitored by an IRB or equivalent oversight body.
7.3() Proposals for use of hPS cells in animals should be considered in
one of the following categories:
(i) Permissible after currently mandated reviews and proper documentation [see Section 1.3(a)]: experiments that are exempt
from full ESCRO committee review but not IACUC review
(experiments that involve only transplantation into postnatal
animals with no likelihood of contributing to the central nervous system or germ line).
(ii) Permissible after additional review by an ESCRO committee, as
described in Section 2.0 of the guidelines [see Section 1.3(b)]:
experiments in which there is a significant possibility that the
implanted hPS cells could give rise to neural or gametic cells
and tissues. Such experiments need full ESCRO committee and
IACUC review and would include generation of all preimplantation chimeras as well as neural transplantation into embryos or
perinatal animals. Particular attention should be paid to at least
three factors: the extent to which the implanted cells colonize
and integrate into the animal tissue; the degree of differentiation 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix C 35
of the implanted cells; and the possible effects of the implanted
cells on the function of the animal tissue.
(iii) Should not be conducted at this time [see Section 1.3(c)]
 (1) Experiments that involve transplantation of hPS cells into
human blastocysts.
 (2) Research in which hPS cells are introduced into nonhuman primate embryos, pending further research that will
clarify the potential of such introduced cells to contribute
to neural tissue or to the germ line.
7.4 Multipotent Neural Stem Cells
It is also relevant to note that neural stem cells, although not pluripotent,
are multipotent and may have the potential to contribute to neural tissue
in chimeric animals. ESCRO committees should decide whether they wish
to review and monitor such experiments with neural stem cells in a similar
fashion.
7.5 Prohibition on Breeding
No animal into which hPS cells have been introduced such that they could
contribute to the germ line should be allowed to breed.
7.6 Guidance for Banking and Distribution
Institutions should consider the value of banking and distributing hPS cells
using the guidance and rules that are already in place for hES cells and the
value of including hPS cell lines in their registries.
8.0 INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
If a U.S.-based investigator collaborates with an investigator in another
country, the ESCRO committee may determine that the procedures prescribed by the foreign institution afford protections consistent with these
guidelines, and the ESCRO committee may approve the substitution of some
of or all of the foreign procedures for its own.
9.0 CONCLUSION
The substantial public support for hES cell research and the growing trend by
many nonfederal funding agencies and state legislatures to support this field 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
36 Appendix C
requires a set of guidelines to provide a framework for hES cell research. In
the absence of the oversight that would come with unrestricted of hES cell
research that falls outside federal funding of this research, these guidelines
will continue to offer reassurance to the public and to Congress that the
scientific community is attentive to ethical concerns and is capable of selfregulation while moving forward with this important research.
To help ensure that these guidelines are taken seriously, stakeholders in
hES cell research—sponsors, funding sources, research institutions, relevant
oversight committees, professional societies, and scientific journals, as well as
investigators—should develop policies and practices that are consistent with
the principles inherent in these guidelines. Funding agencies, professional
societies, journals, and institutional review panels can provide valuable community pressure and impose appropriate sanctions to ensure compliance. For
example, ESCROs and IRBs should require evidence of compliance when
protocols are reviewed for renewal, funding agencies should assess compliance when reviewing applications for support, and journals should require
that evidence of compliance accompanies publication of results.
As individual states and private entities move increasingly into hES cell
research, it will be important to initiate a national effort to provide a formal
context in which the complex moral and oversight questions associated with
this work can be addressed on a continuing basis. Both the state of hES cell
research and clinical practice and public policy surrounding these topics
are in a state of flux and are likely to be so for several years. Therefore, the
committee believes that a national body mechanisms should be established
to assess periodically the adequacy of the policies and guidelines proposed in
this document and elsewhere and to provide a forum for a continuing discussion of issues involved in hES cell research. New policies and standards may
be appropriate for issues that cannot now be foreseen. The organization that
sponsors this body should be politically independent and without conflicts
of interest, should be respected in the lay and scientific communities, and
able to call on suitable expertise to support this effort.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
37
Appendix D
Committee Member and Staff Biographies
COCHAIRS
R. Alta Charo, JD, is the Warren P. Knowles Professor of Law and Bioethics at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, on the faculties of both the
Law School and the Medical School. On August 31, 2009, she took leave
to serve as a senior policy advisor in the Office of the Commissioner of the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Professor Charo is the author of nearly
100 articles, book chapters, and government reports on such topics as voting
rights, environmental law, family planning and abortion law, medical genetics law, reproductive technology policy, science policy, and medical ethics.
She has been a member of the boards of the Alan Guttmacher Institute and
the Foundation for Genetic Medicine, a member of the National Medical
Advisory Committee of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, and
a member of the ethics advisory boards of the International Society for Stem
Cell Research, the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, and WiCell. In
1994, Professor Charo served on the National Institutes of Health Human
Embryo Research Panel, and from 1996 to 2001, she was a member of the
presidential National Bioethics Advisory Commission. She was a member of
the National Academies’ Board on Life Sciences from 2001 until 2007 and
since 2006 has been a member of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) Board on
Population Health and Public Health Practices. Professor Charo was elected
to IOM in 2006.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
38 Appendix D
Richard O. Hynes, PhD, is the Daniel K. Ludwig Professor for Cancer Research at the David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research and
Department of Biology at MIT and a Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Investigator. He was formerly head of the Biology Department and then
director of the Center for Cancer Research at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology. His research focuses on fibronectins and integrins and the
molecular basis of cellular adhesion, both in normal development and in
pathological situations, such as cancer, thrombosis, and inflammation. Dr.
Hynes’s current interests are cancer invasion and metastasis, angiogenesis,
and animal models of human disease states. He is a member of the National
Academy of Sciences and the Institute of Medicine and is a fellow of the
Royal Society of London and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
In 1997, he received the Gairdner International Foundation Award. In 2000,
he served as president of the American Society for Cell Biology and testified before Congress about the need for federal support and oversight of
embryonic stem cell research. He cochaired the 2005 National Academies
Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research and is a governor of
the Wellcome Trust, UK.
MEMBERS
Eli Y. Adashi, MD, MS, CPE, FACOG, is professor of medical science and
the immediate past dean of medicine and biological sciences and the Frank L.
Day Professor of Biology at Brown University. Harvard-educated in Health
Care Management (MS, 2005), Dr. Adashi previously served as the John
A. Dixon Endowed Presidential Professor and Chair of the Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology at the University of Utah Health Sciences Center.
A member of the Council on Foreign Relations, the Council on Population
Growth of the World Economic Forum, the Association of American Physicians, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (ad Eundem),
and the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Dr. Adashi
is a veteran practitioner of women’s health. An adviser to the World Health
Organization, the World Bank, the Rockefeller Foundation and the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation, Dr. Adashi is a recent Franklin fellow and Senior Advisor on Global Women’s Health to the Secretary of State Office of
Global Women’s Issues headed by Ambassador-At-Large Melanne Verveer.
A long-standing NIH-funded scientist and a Research Career Development
Awardee, Dr. Adashi is a former Donna Shalala appointee to the National
Advisory Council of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix D 39
Health and Human Development (NICHD). In addition, Dr. Adashi served
the NIH as a member of the Reproductive Sciences 5-Year Planning Forum
for NICHD, as a member of the selection committee of the Reproductive
Scientist Development Program and as a member of the Reproductive Endocrinology Study Section. A former president of the Society for Reproductive Endocrinologists, the Society for Gynecologic Investigation, and the
American Gynecological and Obstetrical Society, Dr. Adashi is the author
or co-author of over 250 peer-reviewed publications, over 120 book chapters/reviews, and 13 books focusing on ovarian biology, ovarian cancer and
women’s reproductive health, freedom and rights. Elected to the Institute
of Medicine in 1999, Adashi served on consensus committees on Women’s
Health Research, Antiprogestins: Assessing the Science and Understanding Premature Birth and Assuring Health Outcomes. Dr. Adashi has also
served the IOM as a reviewer of New Frontiers in Contraceptive Research,
A Comprehensive Review of the DHHS Office of Family Planning Title X
Program and Policy Issues in the Development of Personalized Medicine
in Oncology. Dr. Adashi is presently serving on the Board of Directors of
Physicians for Human Rights and Population Connection as well as on the
Board of Governors of Tel Aviv University.
A native of Israel, Dr. Adashi received his medical degree in 1973 from
the Sackler School of Medicine of Tel Aviv University. After serving a straight
medical internship in the same, Dr. Adashi (a naturalized U.S. citizen) completed residency training in obstetrics and gynecology at the New England
Medical Center of Tufts University (1974-77). Fellowship training in the
subspecialty of reproductive endocrinology and postdoctoral training in
reproductive biology followed suit at Johns Hopkins University and at the
University of California at San Diego, respectively (1977-81).
Brigid L.M. Hogan, PhD, is the George Barth Geller Professor and chair
of the Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center. Before
joining Duke, Dr. Hogan was an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Hortense B. Ingram Professor in the Department of Cell
Biology at Vanderbilt University Medical Center. Dr. Hogan earned her PhD
in biochemistry at the University of Cambridge. She was then a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Biology at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Before moving to the United States in 1988, Dr. Hogan was
head of the Molecular Embryology Laboratory at the National Institute for
Medical Research in London. Her research focuses on the genetic control
of embryonic development and morphogenesis, using the mouse as a model
system. Her laboratory developed methods for deriving mouse pluripotential 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
40 Appendix D
embryonic germ cell lines. She was co-chair for science of the 1994 National
Institutes of Health Human Embryo Research Panel and a member of the
2001-2002 National Academies Panel on Scientific and Medical Aspects of
Human Cloning. Within the last few years, Dr. Hogan has been elected to
the Royal Society of London, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences,
the Institute of Medicine, and the National Academy of Sciences.
Marcia Imbrescia is the owner of Peartree Design, a landscape design firm,
and was previously the media director for Drumbeater, a high-technology
advertising agency. She holds BA degrees in marketing and journalism and
a graduate certificate in landscape design. Ms. Imbrescia has a passion for
health advocacy and helping people with illness and disability. She is a past
member of the Board of Trustees of the Arthritis Foundation (AF) (2003-
2007), for which she has participated as a volunteer at the chapter and national levels. She served as a member (1996-1998 and 2001) and chairperson
(2002-2003) of AF’s American Juvenile Arthritis Organization. In 1992, she
received the Volunteer of the Year Award from the Massachusetts Chapter
of AF. Her volunteer efforts include program development, conference planning, public speaking, fundraising, and advocacy. Currently, Ms. Imbrescia
is an active volunteer with New England Disabled Sports. She served on the
National Academies Committee on Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem
Cell Research in 2004-2005.
Terry Magnuson, PhD, is Sarah Graham Kenan Professor and chair of the
Department of Genetics at the University of North Carolina. He also directs
the Carolina Center for Genome Sciences and is the program director of cancer genetics at the Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center. Dr. Magnuson’s
research interests include mammalian genetics, genomics, and development.
His laboratory has developed a high-throughput system to study the effects
of mutations on mouse development with mouse embryonic stem cells. He
is particularly interested in the role of chromatin remodeling complexes in
such processes as autosomal imprinting, X-inactivation, and anterior-posterior patterning of axial structures in mammals. He is an elected member
of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and was a member of the
Board of Directors of the Genetics Society of America and of the Society for
Developmental Biology.
Linda B. Miller, OTR, MS in hospital administration, is president of the
Washington, DC–based Volunteer Trustees Foundation, a consortium of notfor-profit hospital governing boards. She has extensive experience in trustee 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix D 41
education, advocacy, and the legal, ethical, and policy issues facing voluntary
health care institutions. Recently, she has worked closely with the states’
attorneys general in developing guidelines for protecting the community
interest in the sale and conversion of nonprofit hospitals and in designing
models for practice and legal oversight. She was elected to membership in
the Institute of Medicine (IOM) in 1997.
Ms. Miller has been a frequent speaker on health-policy issues and has
been published extensively in both the medical and popular press, including the New England Journal of Medicine, Health Affairs, USA Today, the
Washington Post, and the New York Times. She served as a special assistant
to the secretary of health, education, and welfare (now the Department of
Health and Human Services) and on numerous health-related policy councils and advisory committees, including the National Institutes of Health’s
Consensus Panel on Liver Transplantation and, most recently, IOM’s Committee on Spinal Cord Injury. Ms. Miller serves on the Advisory Board of
the University of Louisville–based Institute for Cellular Therapeutics, headed
by Suzanne Ildstad, which does research in adult bone marrow transplantation, and has been a member of several academic and health-care institutions’ boards of governors, including those of Blythedale Children’s Hospital
in New York, Capital Hospice in the national capital region, and Cornell
University’s Alumni Council.
Jonathan D. Moreno, PhD, is the David and Lyn Silfen University Professor
of Ethics and professor of medical ethics and of the history and sociology
of science at the University of Pennsylvania. He holds a courtesy appointment as professor of philosophy. He is also a senior fellow at the Center for
American Progress in Washington, D.C., where edits the magazine Science
Progress (www.scienceprogress.org). He was a member of President Barack
Obama’s transition team for the Department of Health and Human Services.
Moreno is an elected member of the Institute of Medicine/National Academy
of Sciences. In 2008 he was designated a National Associate of the National
Research Council. He has served as a senior staff member for two presidential advisory commissions, and has given invited testimony for both houses of
congress. He was an Andrew W. Mellon post doctoral fellow, holds an honorary doctorate from Hofstra University, and is a recipient of the Benjamin
Rush Medal from the College of William and Mary Law School. Moreno
has served as adviser to the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation, among many other organizations. Moreno
is also a faculty affiliate of the Kennedy Institute of Ethics at Georgetown
University and a fellow of the Hastings Center and the New York Academy 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
42 Appendix D
of Medicine. He is a past president of the American Society for Bioethics
and Humanities. His books include Progress in Bioethics (2010); Science
Next: Innovation for the Common Good (2009); Mind Wars: Brain Research and National Defense (2006); Undue Risk: Secret State Experiments
on Humans (1999); Ethical Guidelines for Innovative Surgery (2006); Is
There an Ethicist in the House? (2005); In the Wake of Terror: Medicine
and Morality in a Time of Crisis (2003); Ethical and Regulatory Aspects of
Clinical Research (2003); Deciding Together: Bioethics and Moral Consensus
(1995); Ethics in Clinical Practice (2000); and Arguing Euthanasia (1995).
Moreno has published more than 300 papers, reviews and book chapters,
and is a member of several editorial boards.
Pilar N. Ossorio, PhD, JD, is associate professor of law and bioethics at
the University of Wisconsin–Madison and program faculty in the Graduate
Program in Population Health at the university. Before taking her position
there, she was director of the Genetics Section of the Institute for Ethics at
the American Medical Association and taught as an adjunct faculty member
at the University of Chicago Law School. For the 2006 calendar year, Professor Ossorio was a visiting professor of law at the University of California,
Berkeley Boalt Hall School of Law.
Dr. Ossorio received her PhD in microbiology and immunology in 1990
from Stanford University. She went on to complete a postdoctoral fellowship
in cell biology at Yale University School of Medicine. Throughout the early
1990s, Dr. Ossorio worked as a consultant for the federal program on the
Ethical, Legal, and Social Implications (ELSI) of the Human Genome Project;
in 1994, she took a full-time position with the Department of Energy’s ELSI
program. In 1993, she served on the Ethics Working Group for President
Clinton’s Health Care Reform Task Force. Dr. Ossorio received her JD from
the Boalt Hall School of Law in 1997. While there, she was elected to the
legal honor society Order of the Coif and received several awards for outstanding legal scholarship.
Dr. Ossorio is a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), on the Editorial Board of the American Journal of
Bioethics, an adviser to the National Human Genome Research Institute on
ethical issues in large-scale sequencing, and a member of the University of
Wisconsin’s institutional review board for health-sciences research. She is a
past member of AAAS’s Committee on Scientific Freedom and Responsibility, a past member of the National Cancer Policy Board in the Institute of
Medicine, and a past member or chair of several working groups on genet-
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix D 43
ics and ethics. She has published scholarly articles in bioethics, law, and
molecular biology.
E. Albert Reece, MD, PhD, is dean of the University of Maryland School of
Medicine and vice president for medical affairs at the University of Maryland, Baltimore. Previously, he was vice chancellor and dean of the University of Arkansas College of Medicine. Dr. Reece received his undergraduate
degree from Long Island University, his MD (Magna Cum Laude) from New
York University, his PhD in biochemistry from the University of the West
Indies, and his MBA from the Fox School of Business and Management of
Temple University. He completed a residency in obstetrics and gynecology
at Columbia University–Presbyterian Hospital and a fellowship in maternal-fetal medicine at Yale University School of Medicine. He served on the
faculty at Yale for 10 years and was the chairman of the Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences at Temple University. Dr.
Reece has published over 400 journal articles, book chapters, and abstracts
and nine textbooks, including Diabetes in Pregnancy, Medicine of the Fetus
& Mother, and Fundamentals of Obstetric & Gynecologic Ultrasound. He
is an editor for the Journal of Maternal-Fetal Medicine and a reviewer for
several other scientific journals. His research focuses on diabetes in pregnancy, birth defects, and prenatal diagnosis. Dr. Reece is a member of the
Institute of Medicine.
Joshua R. Sanes, PhD, is professor of molecular and cellular biology and the
Paul J. Finnegan Family Director of the Center for Brain Science at Harvard
University. He was previously Alumni Endowed Professor of Neurobiology
at the Washington University School of Medicine. Dr. Sanes earned a BA in
biochemistry and psychology at Yale and a PhD in Neurobiology at Harvard. He studies the formation of the synapses that interconnect nerve cells,
including pioneering work on the signals exchanged between nerve cells
and their target muscles as new connections are made. He is also using the
vertebrate visual system to examine how nerve cells develop and migrate to
the right location in the body. He has been elected a fellow of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science and a member of the National
Academy of Sciences and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Harold T. Shapiro, PhD, is president emeritus of both Princeton University
and the University of Michigan and is currently professor of economics and
public affairs at Princeton University. His research interests include bioethics,
the social role of higher education, hospital and medical- center administra-
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
44 Appendix D
tion, university administration, econometrics, statistics, and economics. Dr.
Shapiro chaired the Board of Trustees of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, was
presiding director for the Dow Chemical Company, and is a member of numerous boards, including the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, HCA,
the Merck Vaccine Advisory Board, the Knight Foundation Commission on
Intercollegiate Athletics, the U.S. Olympic Committee, and the Stem Cell
Institute of New Jersey. He is a former chair of the Association of American
Universities and the National Bioethics Advisory Committee and vice chair
of the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. He has
also served on the Board of Directors of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc. and the Board of Trustees of the Universities Research Association, Inc. He has chaired and served on numerous National Academies
committees, including the Committee on the Organizational Structure of
the National Institutes of Health and the Committee on Particle Physics. Dr.
Shapiro was named the 2006 American Association for the Advancement of
Science William D. Carey Lecturer for his leadership in science policy. He
earned a PhD in economics from Princeton University and holds 14 honorary doctorates.
John E. Wagner, Jr., MD, is a professor of pediatrics at the University of
Minnesota Medical School. He is the first recipient of the Children’s Cancer
Research Fund/Hageboeck Family Chair in Pediatric Oncology and also
holds the University of Minnesota McKnight Presidential Chair in Cancer Research. He is the director of the Division of Pediatric Hematology/
Oncology and Bone Marrow Transplantation and scientific director of clinical research of the Stem Cell Institute. Dr. Wagner is a member of numerous
societies, including the American Society of Hematology, the International
Society of Experimental Hematology, and the American Society of Blood
and Marrow Transplantation. He is a member of several honorary societies, including Alpha Omega Alpha (1980), the American Society of Clinical
Investigation (2000), and the Association of American Physicians (2006).
Dr. Wagner holds a patent on the isolation of the pluripotential quiescent
stem cell population. Dr. Wagner holds a BA in biological sciences and a BA
in psychology from the University of Delaware and an MD from Jefferson
Medical College. Dr. Wagner’s research has focused on the development
of novel cellular therapies for tissue repair and suppression of the immune
response using subpopulations of neonatal umbilical cord blood and adult
bone marrow and peripheral blood. His projects are funded by the National Institutes of Health and industry. In addition, Dr. Wagner pioneered
the use of embryo selection to “create” a perfectly tissue-matched stem cell 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix D 45
donor for the treatment of genetic disease. Dr. Wagner has written more
than 250 articles and book chapters in the field of hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation. He previously served as a member of the Scientific Board
of Directors of the National Marrow Donor Program and on the Institute
of Medicine’s Committee on Establishing a National Cord Blood Stem Cell
Banking Program. He is currently a member of the Scientific and Medical
Accountability Standards Working Group of the California Institute of Regenerative Medicine.
STAFF
Adam P. Fagen, PhD, is a senior program officer with the Board on Life
Sciences of the National Research Council. He came to the National Academies from Harvard University, where he most recently served as preceptor
on molecular and cellular biology. He earned his PhD in molecular biology
and education from Harvard, working on issues related to undergraduate
science courses; his research focused on mechanisms for assessing and enhancing introductory science courses in biology and physics to encourage
student learning and conceptual understanding, including studies of active
learning, classroom demonstrations, and student understanding of genetics
vocabulary. Dr. Fagen also received an AM in molecular and cellular biology from Harvard, based on laboratory research in molecular evolutionary
genetics, and a BA from Swarthmore College with a double-major in biology
and mathematics. He served as co-director of the 2000 National Doctoral
Program Survey, an on-line assessment of doctoral programs organized by
the National Association of Graduate-Professional Students, supported by
the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, and completed by over 32,000 students.
At the National Academies, Dr. Fagen has served as study director for
Bridges to Independence: Fostering the Independence of New Investigators
in Biomedical Research (2005), Treating Infectious Diseases in a Microbial
World: Report of Two Workshops on Novel Antimicrobial Therapeutics
(2006), 2007 and 2008 Amendments to the National Academies’ Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research (2007, 2008), Understanding Interventions that Encourage Minorities to Pursue Research Careers:
Summary of a Workshop (2007), Inspired by Biology: From Molecules to
Materials to Machines (2008), Transforming Agricultural Education for a
Changing World (2009), Responsible Research with Biological Select Agents
and Toxins (2009), and Research at the Intersection of the Physical and Life
Sciences (2010). He is currently study director or responsible staff officer
for several ongoing projects including the National Academies Summer 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
46 Appendix D
Institute on Undergraduate Education in Biology, the National Academies
Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee, and the Special
Immunizations Program for Laboratory Personnel Engaged in Research on
Countermeasures for Select Agents.
Bruce M. Altevogt, PhD, is a senior program officer in the Board on Health
Sciences Policy at the Institute of Medicine (IOM). His primary interests
focus on policy issues related to basic research and preparedness for catastrophic events. He received his doctoral thesis from Harvard University’s
Program in Neuroscience. Following over 10 years of research, Dr. Altevogt
joined The National Academies as a science and technology policy fellow
with the Christine Mirzayan Science & Technology Policy Graduate Fellowship Program. Since joining the Board on Health Sciences Policy, he has
been a program officer on multiple IOM studies including, Sleep Disorders
and Sleep Deprivation: An Unmet Public Health Problem, The National
Academies’ Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research: 2007
Amendments and 2008 Amendments, and Research Priorities in Emergency
Preparedness and Response for Public Health Systems. He is currently serving as the director of the Forum on Medical and Public Health Preparedness
for Catastrophic Events, the Neuroscience and Nervous System Disorders
Forum, and as a co-study director on the National Academies Human Embryonic Stem Cells Research Advisory Committee. He received his BA from
the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, where he majored in biology
and minored in South Asian studies.
Frances E. Sharples, PhD, has served as director of the National Research
Council’s Board on Life Sciences since October 2000. Immediately prior to
this position, she was a senior policy analyst for the Environment Division
of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) for four
years. Dr. Sharples came to OSTP from the Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
where she served in various positions in the Environmental Sciences Division between 1978 and 1996, most recently as a Research and Development
Section Head. Dr. Sharples received her BA in biology from Barnard College
and her MA and PhD in zoology from the University of California, Davis.
She served as an American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS) Environmental Science and Engineering Fellow at the Environmental Protection Agency during the summer of 1981, and served as a AAAS
Congressional Science and Engineering Fellow in the office of Senator Al
Gore in 1984-85. She was a member of the National Institutes of Health’s 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Appendix D 47
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee in the mid-1980s, and was elected
a Fellow of the AAAS in 1992.
Andrew M. Pope, PhD, is director of the Board on Health Sciences Policy
in the Institute of Medicine (IOM). He has a PhD in physiology and biochemistry from the University of Maryland and has been a member of the
National Academies staff since 1982 and of the IOM staff since 1989. His
primary interests are science policy, biomedical ethics, and environmental
and occupational influences on human health. During his tenure at the
National Academies, Dr. Pope has directed numerous studies on topics that
range from injury control, disability prevention, and biologic markers to
the protection of human subjects of research, National Institutes of Health
priority-setting processes, organ procurement and transplantation policy,
and the role of science and technology in countering terrorism. Dr. Pope is
the recipient of IOM’s Cecil Award and the National Academy of Sciences
President’s Special Achievement Award.
Amanda P. Cline, is a senior program assistant with the Board on Life Sciences at the National Academies. She earned a BS in environmental studies
from Bucknell University in 2006.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Final Report of The National Academies' Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Advisory Committee and 2010 Amendments to The National Academies' Guidelines for Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research 