


Published by:
Director General
Indian Council of Medical Research
New Delhi 110029
December 2013
Cover page created by:
Dr. Geeta Jotwani
Foreword i
Acknowledgement iii
Abbreviations iv
1.0 Preamble 1
2.0 Aims and Scope 2
3.0 General Principles 3
4.0 Ethical Considerations Determining Specific Principles Related 3
to Stem Cell Research
5.0 Classification of Stem Cells 6
6.0 Categories of Research on Stem Cells 7
6.1 Permitted Areas of Research
6.2 Restricted Areas of Research
6.3 Prohibited Areas of Research
7.0 Responsibility for Conduct of Stem Cell Research: of Investigator, 11
Institute and Sponsor
8.0 Mechanism for Review and Monitoring 12
9.0 Basic Research 14
9.1 Derivation, Differentiation and Characterization of Human Pluripotent
Stem Cells Some General Gonsiderations
9.2 Basic Stem Cell Biology
10.0 Translational Research Including Clinical Trials 15
10.1Preclinical Research
10.2Clinical Research
11.0 Tissue Engineering and Scaffolds in Stem Cell Research 19
12.0 Banking of Umbilical Cord Blood and Other Biological Tissues 21
Including Cell Lines
13.0 Procurement of Biological Material for Research 24
13.1 Fetal/Placental Tissue
13.2 Gametes, Blastocysts (Preimplantation Embryos) or Somatic Cells for
Generation of hES/iPS Cell Lines
14.0 International Collaboration 27
15.0 Exchange of Biological Material for Research 27
16.0 Public Participation 28
17.0 Periodic Review of Guidelines 28
References for Further Reading 29
Annexure-I Monitoring Mechanism 31
Annexure-II Clinical Trial Protocol Using Stem Cells 35
Glossary 39
Drafting Committees 43
National Apex Committee for Stem Cell Research and Therapy 45

Foreword
The field of stem cell research is still young. Successful culture and characterization of human embryonic
stem cells was achieved just over a decade ago. Since then, some advances have been made towards
understanding the basic biology of stemness and their differentiation into different cell lineages, but harnessing of
their promised potential to usher in the era of regenerative medicine is still a long way to go. Several clinical trials
have been carried out using autologous or allogenic CD34+ve hematopoietic stem cells or mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) in a variety of clinical indications but most of these have been Phase I or early Phase II trials. There is no
conclusive proof of safety or therapeutic efficacy of stem cells in any condition yet. Unfortunately, some clinicians
have started exploiting hapless patients by offering unproven stem cell treatments prematurely. Such fraudulent
practices need to be stopped urgently, while ensuring that scientifically designed and responsible research on stem
cells is not hindered. In 2007, the Indian Council of Medical Research and the Department of Biotechnology jointly
released Guidelines for Stem Cell Research and Therapy, which now need to be revised to reflect new scientific and
clinical findings that have significantly changed the scope of stem cell research and possible translation.
The present guidelines have retained the earlier classification of stem cell research into three categories,
namely Permitted, Restricted and Prohibited categories; an additional layer of oversight, besides the Institutional
Ethics Committee (IEC), in the form of Institutional Committee for Stem Cell Research (IC-SCR) and National Apex
Committee for Stem Cell Research and Therapy (NAC-SCRT) has been introduced. This mechanism of additional
review has been accepted by the scientific community in the country and the required NAC-SCRT has become
operational. The role and functioning of these committees is being streamlined.
Since 2007 there have been several new developments in the field of stem cell research that significantly
change the landscape. This includes the development of induced Pluripotent Stem (iPS) cells by introduction of a
limited number of genes into adult somatic cells, paving the way for the generation of histocompatible or patientspecific pluripotent stem cells. Also, progress has been made in growing stem cells without xenogeneic feeder cells;
and in well-defined media free from foetal calf serum. However, significant challenges remain with respect to
characterizing the cell product for therapy for its purity, safety and potency in an expeditious and cost-effective
manner. Updated guidelines are therefore critical to incorporate these advances and to harmonize them with the
internationally revised guidelines. Towards this end, the Indian Council of Medical Research (Department of Health
Research) and the Department of Biotechnology have conducted a series of public consultations in different parts of
the country to elicit the views of various stake holders including scientists, physicians, members of civil society,
patient groups, media and industry. The Drafting Committee has taken cognizance of these deliberations and also
held in-depth discussions with various expert groups over an extended period, to prepare these revised guidelines. 
One major recommendation of the Committee has been to omit the word Therapy from the title of the
Guidelines. This has been done to emphasize the fact that stem cells are still not a part of standard of care; hence
there can be no guidelines for therapy until efficacy is proven. These guidelines are intended to cover only stem cell
research, both basic and translational, and not therapy. It has been made clear in these Guidelines that any stem cell
use in patients, other than that for hematopoietic stem cell reconstitution for approved indications, is investigational
at present. Accordingly, any stem cell use in patients must only be done within the purview of an approved and
monitored clinical trial with the intent to advance science and medicine, and not offering it as therapy. In accordance
with this stringent definition, every use of stem cells in patients outside an approved clinical trial shall be considered
as malpractice. It is hoped that this clear definition will serve to curb the malpractice of stem cell “therapy” being
offered as a new tool for curing untreatable diseases.
The Indian Council of Medical Research (Department of Health Research) and the Department of
Biotechnology gratefully acknowledge the contribution of Prof. Shyam Agarwal in strategizing, conceptualising and
finalizing the National Guidelines for Stem Cell Research. 
Acknowledgements
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Department of Health Research (DHR) and Department of
Biotechnology (DBT) gratefully acknowledge the contribution made by the members of the Drafting
Committee for updating Guidelines for Stem Cell Research, keeping in view the opinions of various
stakeholders and also the recent developmentsin the field of Stem Cell Research.
ICMR and DBT also acknowledge the participation of scientists, physicians, members of civil society,
patient groups, media and industry during public consultations on Guidelines for Stem Cell Research &
Therapy (2007) conducted in different parts of the country to have consensus on the document.
The Division of Basic Medical Sciences, Indian Council of Medical Research organized a series of meetings
of Drafting Committee for these Guidelines. The valuable contributions of (Late) Dr. S. S. Agarwal, Chairman
and Dr. A. N. Bhisey, Co-chairman of drafting committee in steering and active discussion by members
during these meetings are highly appreciated. Special thanks are due to the three member sub-committee
of NAC-SCRT headed by Prof. N. K. Mehra for their contribution in giving shape to this document. We
gratefully appreciate Dr. Alok Srivastava, Chairman and all members of the NAC-SCRT for finalization of
National Guidelines for Stem Cell Research (2013).
The patronage of Dr V. M. Katoch, the Secretary, Department of Health Research & Director General, ICMR
and Dr. K. VijayRaghavan, Secretary, Department of Biotechnology for their continued support is gratefully
acknowledged.
Special appreciations are due to Dr. Geeta Jotwani in co-ordination and compilation of these Guidelines.
New Delhi Dr. Vijay Kumar
December, 2013 Scientist 'G' and Head
Division of Basic Medical Sciences
 Indian Council of Medical Research
Abbreviations
CDSCO - Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
CTRI - Clinical Trial Registry India
DBT - Department of Biotechnology
DCGI - Drugs Controller General of India
DNA - Deoxy-ribonucleic Acid
DST - Department of Science and Technology
ECM - Extra Cellular Matrix
GCP - Good Clinical Practices
GLP - Good Laboratory Practices
GMP - Good Manufacturing Practices
GOI - Government of India
GTP - Good Tissue Practices
EGC - Embryonic Germ Cells
ESC - Embryonic Stem Cells
iPSC - Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
HLA - Human Leukocyte Antigens
HMSC - Health Minister's Screening Committee
HSC - Hematopoietic Stem Cell
HSCT - Haematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
IAEC - Institutional Animal Ethics Committee
IC-SCR - Institutional Committee for Stem Cell Research
ICM - Inner Cell Mass
ICMR - Indian Council of Medical Research
IEC - Institutional Ethics Committee
IND - Investigational New Drug
IPR - Intellectual Property Rights
IVF - In-vitro Fertilization
MOU - Memorandum of Understanding
MSC - Mesenchymal Stem Cells
MTA - Material Transfer Agreement
MTP - Medical Termination of Pregnancy
NAC-SCRT - National Apex Committee for Stem Cell Research and Therapy
NBE - New Biological Entity
PSC - Pluripotent Stem Cell
SCNT - Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer
SOP - Standard Operating Procedures
SSCs - Somatic Stem Cells
TOP - Termination of Pregnancy
1
Guidelines for Stem Cell Research
1.0 Preamble
Use of stem cells in regenerative medicine holds promise for improving human
health by restoring the function of cells and organs damaged due to degeneration or
injury. Stem cell biology has potential application in several areas of biomedical
research that includes drug development, toxicity testing, developmental biology,
disease modelling, tissue engineering etc. Like many innovations, stem cell research
also involves scientific, ethical and social issues. Apart from challenges of using
appropriate stem cells for a particular condition, there are important issues related
to the use of embryos for creating human embryonic stem (hES) cell lines. As these
may lead to commoditization of human tissues and cells, there is inherent risk of
exploitation of individuals particularly those belonging to the underprivileged
groups, and challenges related to the contentious issue of human germ-line
engineering and reproductive cloning.
Premature use of stem cells for therapy before obtaining adequate data on their
safety and efficacy has created an unprecedented problem related to therapeutic
profligacy with vulnerable patients being exploited. The potential danger of
tumorigenicity of stem cells considering their capacity for unlimited proliferation,
possibility of genomic changes arising during in-vitro manipulations, and limitations
related to immunological tissue incompatibility between individuals are all causes for
concern. Of equal importance is the assurance of safety and rights of those donating
stem cells of all types for basic and clinical research. Safeguards must be in place to
protect subjects receiving stem cells through enrolment in clinical trials. Societal
concerns regarding compensation for research related injuries and adverse effects
are all also issues that need to be addressed.
As with any new scientific development having the potential for improving human
health, research in this field must be regulated with special attention to these issues.
The guiding philosophy should be to promote scientific and ethical stem cell research
while preventing premature commercialization and potential exploitation of
vulnerable patients.
The revised version of the National Guidelines for Stem Cell Research 2013 takes into
consideration the above mentioned issues. It also takes note of the fact that 
2
pluripotent stem cells of different kinds have entered clinical trials and hence
appropriate guidelines are required for their use.
2.0 Aim and Scope
These Guidelines apply to all stakeholders including individual researchers,
organizations, sponsors, oversight/regulatory committees and any others associated
with both basic and clinical research on all types of human stem cells and their
derivatives. These guidelines do not apply to research using non-human stem cells or
tissues. Further, they do not regulate the use of hematopoietic stem cells for
treatment of various haematological, immunological and metabolic disorders which
has already been established as a standard of medical care.
The guidelines reiterate that the general principles of biomedical research involving
human participants shall also be applicable to all human stem cell research.
2.1 The Guidelines specify unique provisions of stem cells, because of their potential for
unlimited proliferation, differentiation to cells of the germ layers, regeneration of
tissues, and their involvement in pre-implantation stages of human development.
The guidelines therefore include:
2.1.1. Procurement of gametes, embryos and somatic cells for derivation and
propagation of pluripotent and multipotent stem cell lines, their banking and
distribution.
2.1.2. Regulated differentiation into desired progenitor cells and their characterization,
2.1.3. Use of human stem cells and other progenitors derived from them, or their
products for basic and clinical research.
The guidelines have been laid down to ensure that research with human stem cells is
conducted in a responsible and ethical manner and complies with all regulatory
requirements pertaining to biomedical research in general and of stem cell research
in particular.
It is important to recognize that this is a rapidly evolving field hence; the
recommendations may change over time. It is the responsibility of the researcher
and the Institutional Review Committees to understand the principles of these
guidelines and keep abreast with the existing regulations in the country.
3
3.0 General Principles
Research on human subjects involving cells and tissues derived from human embryos
and foetuses must safeguard human rights, dignity, and fundamental freedom. This
includes processes related to obtaining human tissues and cells for research,
diagnosis and therapy. The fundamental tenets of beneficence, non-malfeasance,
justice and autonomy should be adhered to in all research involving human subjects.
To achieve these objectives, all research involving the use of stem cells must be
guided by the general principles laid down in the “Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical
Research on Human Participants” published in 2006 by the Indian Council of Medical
Research (ICMR) and specific principles related to stem cells as detailed in Section 4
of these guidelines must be followed.
The general principles to be followed are given below:
 Principle of essentiality
 Principles of voluntariness, informed consent and community agreement
 Principle of non-exploitation
 Principle of privacy and confidentiality
 Principle of precaution and risk minimization
 Principle of professional competence
 Principle of accountability and transparency
 Principle of maximization of public interest and distributive justice
 Principle of institutional arrangements
 Principle of public domain
 Principle of totality of responsibility
 Principle of compliance
The details of the above may be seen in the parent document
(http://www.icmr.nic.in/ethical_guidelines.pdf)
4.0 Ethical Considerations Determining Specific Principles Related to Stem Cell
Research
Stem cells are unique in many ways. The two basic characteristics of stem
pluripotent cells are their capacity for self-renewal and multi lineage differentiation.
They may survive indefinitely and differentiate unpredictably when introduced into 
4
the human host. They may also give rise to tumours such as teratomas. Some of the
major concerns that are specific to their collection, processing, storage and use,
particularly of the human ES cells for translational research are listed below:
4.1 Health and Safety of Donors: Prior to procurement of stem cells for research, it is
mandatory to obtain informed consent from the donor. The donor must be informed
about the need for screening of transmittable diseases (about which the donor may
or may not be aware of) and possible risks involved in donation particularly during
major invasive procedures such as ovum or bone marrow donation, under local or
general anaesthesia. The donor shall also be informed that cell lines may be
generated from the donated material and that these may be banked and shared with
other scientific groups. The cell lines may also undergo genetic manipulation, and
have the potential for commercialization. In the latter event however, the
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) will not vest with the donor. Also, while
confidentiality and privacy are sacrosanct, provision must be made for traceability in
a contingency situation. The donor should be made aware that he/she may be
contacted in future for specific requirements.
Special care needs to be taken when cells are obtained from embryos and foetuses.
Also, donation of gametes and embryos raise special ethical and moral concerns. It is
necessary to ensure that the donors are not exploited and commoditized.
4.2 Manufacture and Quality Assurance of Stem Cell Products: It is recognised that
human adult tissues also have an inherent population of stem cells. In order to
obtain these cells in sufficient numbers, some degree of processing, enrichment
and/or in vitro expansion may be required. Further, manipulations may be needed to
enhance their utility. One of the challenges in testing the potency of stem cells is the
lack of suitable animal models. Innovative surrogate assays are needed for the
purpose.
4.2.1 In case of human ES or iPS cells, targeted differentiation may be required to
generate appropriate cells of interest and to separate them from undifferentiated
cells. For individualized preparation of iPS cells, abbreviated tests of safety and
efficacy are needed to provide timely release of the therapeutic product.
4.2.2 Cell culture techniques require stringent controls to avoid contamination and
batch to batch variation. In case autologous or histocompatible iPS cells are used,
the cell product should be processed individually for each patient. 
5
4.2.3 Therapeutic cell products should be prepared as in compliance with the
GLP/GMP/GTP guidelines and other laboratory conditions depending on the
purpose of each use.
4.2.4 All reagents and media used in the process should be of ‘clinical grade’, intended
to be administered to humans.
4.2.5 Stringent characterization of the product with reference to its identity, purity and
safety as well as genomic stability, tumorigenicity and potency is essential before
its release for human use.
4.2.6 Appropriate quality control and assurances should be in place.
4.3 Design of Clinical Trials: Clinical trials using stem cells need to be planned carefully,
with follow-up periods suitable for the subject being evaluated, and should also
incorporate appropriate end points. It is essential that stakeholders involved in the
clinical trials related to stem cells are fully conversant with the current regulations in
the field. It is important to ensure that no unproven stem cell therapy is offered
outside of the well-controlled clinical trials.
4.4 Specific Requirements: Keeping the above considerations in mind, it is emphasized
that besides general principles of biomedical research, specific principles need to be
evolved to regulate stem cell research, particularly in relation to its translational
role. This document is an effort in this direction, to ensure that progress in the field
for potential benefit to mankind does not get stymied. To achieve this objective
three fundamental principles as under must be followed:
4.4.1 An extra layer of oversight by those who are knowledgeable about the special
issues related to stem cells
4.4.2 Periodic evaluation of advances in the field by expert groups and appropriate
modification of regulations as and when deemed necessary
4.4.3 Categorizing of stem cell research into three areas viz. permitted, restricted and
prohibited, according to the expected risk and level of supervision required for
each category. For details, please refer to Section 6 of this document.
4.5 Intellectual Property Rights and Social Responsibility: Research on stem cells/ lines
and their applications may have considerable commercial value. Appropriate IPR
protection may be considered on the merits of each case. If the IPR is commercially
exploited, a proportion of the benefits shall be returned to the community, which 
6
has directly or indirectly contributed to the product. “Community” includes all
potential beneficiaries such as patient and research groups.
5.0 Classification of Stem Cells
Based on the cell type/tissue of origin, stem cells are classified into Somatic Stem
Cells (SSCs), and Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs). SSCs have limited differentiation
capacity and may be multipotent or unipotent. ESCs on the other hand are
pluripotent and this characteristic can also be generated by reprogramming of
somatic cells, giving rise to induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs). The regulatory
requirements for research on stem cells depend on their origin and potency.
5.1 Somatic Stem Cells (SSCs) are a resident, self-renewable population of cells which
are present in virtually all organs/tissues of the body. They are essentially
undifferentiated, resident in differentiated tissues and are committed to the lineage
of that organ. They may, however, have limited plasticity.
5.1.1. SSCs obtained from different sources viz., the foetus, umbilical cord, placenta,
infant, child or adult; and from different organs/tissues, may vary in their
proliferative and differentiation potential.
5.1.2. The SSCs in bone marrow, skin and gastrointestinal tract continuously divide and
differentiate throughout life, but in other organs they remain dormant until they
are required for repair and replacement.
5.1.3. SSCs are present in relatively low numbers in most tissues, and may therefore
need to be enriched and expanded prior to use. Prolonged cell culture/expansion
carries the risk of contamination with microorganisms and potential genomic
alterations which should be avoided. Further, cells, culture media and other
ingredients, particularly those of animal origin, may carry the risk of introducing
xenogeneic pathogens and inducing immune reactivity.
5.1.4. Research on SSCs largely falls under the permitted category and can be carried
out with prior approval of the Institutional Committee for Stem Cell research (ICSCR).
5.2 Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs) are derived from pre-implantation embryos. Those
derived from embryos before differentiation of trophoectoderm and inner cell mass
(i.e. morula stage) are truly totipotent, capable of giving rise to the entire organism
and extraembryonic tissues. However, ESCs derived from the inner cell mass (ICM)
are pluripotent (not totipotent), having ability to differentiate into derivatives of all
three germ layers, viz., ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm, but not placenta. 
7
5.3 Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs), as the name suggests are pluripotent in
nature, quite similar to the ESCs but may not be exactly the same. They are capable
of indefinite expansion and differentiation into ectodermal, mesodermal and
endodermal cells. The iPS cells can be generated from somatic cells by a variety of
genetic and epigenetic methods.
Both ESCs and iPSCs, and their derivatives, can be maintained and expanded as pure
populations of undifferentiated cells under appropriate conditions. With appropriate
stimuli they can be differentiated into lineage specific progenitor and differentiated
cells, e.g., neurons, cardiomyocytes and others. The tumorigenic potential of ESCs
and iPSCs is a major safety concern for therapeutic applications.
6.0 Categories of Research on Stem Cells
According to the source of stem cells and nature of experiments, research on human
stem cells is categorized into following three areas:
6.1 Permitted Areas of Research
6.1.1 In vitro studies on pluripotent stem cell lines viz. ES or iPS cells, or SSCs from
foetal or adult tissues, for understanding their basic biology, may be carried out
with prior approval of IC-SCR.
6.1.1.1 The ES cell lines used for such research should be established following the
ethical guidelines as laid down in this document and should be registered with
the NAC-SCRT through IC-SCR.
6.1.1.2 Stem cell lines from sources outside the country should have been established
as per the regulatory requirements of the country of origin. These should also
meet the National Guidelines as per this document.
Documentation/Certification to this effect should be available with the
investigator.
6.1.2 In vivo studies in experimental animals (other than primates, see Clause 6.2) with
established cell lines from any type of human pluripotent stem cells viz., ES, iPS,
including differentiated derivatives of these cells, and human SSCs (foetal,
neonatal or adult) from any tissue, with prior approval of IC-SCR and IAEC. Such
animals shall not be allowed to breed if the stem cells are likely to be
incorporated in the gonads. These studies are needed for pre-clinical evaluation
of efficacy and safety of human stem cells or their derivatives. 
8
6.1.3 Establishment of new human ES cell lines from spare embryos or iPS cell lines
from foetal/adult somatic cells, with prior approval of the IC-SCR, provided
appropriate consent is obtained from the donor as per guidelines given in this
document (Section 13). Once the ES cell line is established, it shall be registered
with NAC-SCRT through IC-SCR with appropriate documentation. Such cell lines
to be deposited in an accredited cell bank for use by other investigators. Similarly
all iPS cell lines so derived shall be registered with the NAC-SCRT through IC-SCR,
if intended for use in clinical research/ trials. Details of their derivation and
characterization should be included.
6.1.4 Establishment and licensing of Umbilical Cord Blood stem cell banks falls under
purview of the Drug Controller General of India (DCGI). The guidelines notified by
CDSCO available at http://cdsco.nic.in/html/GSR%20899.pdf should be followed.
6.1.5 Clinical trials with clinical grade SSCs processed as per National GLP/ GMP / GTP
guidelines as applicable (but without major manipulation: see clause 6.1.6.3
below), may be carried out with prior approval of IC-SCR and IEC. Prior approval
of DCGI is required if it is intended to seek market authorization for the
investigational product. All clinical trials on stem cells shall be registered with
Clinical Trial Registry India (CTRI). http://ctri.nic.in/Clinicaltrials/login.php)
6.1.6 Levels of manipulation: Before use of stem cells for translation; almost all stem
cells, whether autologous or allogeneic, need some degree of in-vitro, or ex-vivo
processing before being re-introduced into human body. This carries the risk of
contamination and/or alteration in the properties of cells, which may vary
according to the degree and type of manipulation. Different degrees of
manipulation are defined below:
6.1.6.1 Minimal manipulation: No intended alteration in cell population or function.
This may include separation of mononuclear cells, washing, centrifugation
and suspension in acceptable medium and a maximum of overnight storage
under appropriate conditions. All laboratory procedures should be carried
out under aseptic conditions in a GLP and GMP certified facility.
6.1.6.2 Substantial manipulation (or More than minimal manipulation): Defined as
ex vivo alterations in the cell population (enhancement or depletion of
specific subsets), expansion, cryopreservation, or cytokine based activation
which is not expected to result in alteration of function. All laboratory
processes should be compliant with GLP and GMP certified facilities.
9
6.1.6.3 Major manipulation: Genetic and epigenetic modification of stem cells,
transient or permanent, which results in alternation of function, is considered
to be a major manipulation. This includes transdifferentiation, transduction /
transfection by retro / lenti viruses or other gene delivery vehicles to achieve
specific selection and expansion of cells of interest. These alterations may
also be carried out at transcriptional or translational level. This also includes
regulated lineage specific differentiation of human ES and iPS cells into the
desired cellular products. Clinical trials using cells which have undergone
major manipulation shall require approval of DCGI after obtaining approval
from NAC-SCRT through IC-SCR and IEC.
6.1.7 Special care should be taken for cells propagated in culture since they may
acquire random genetic alterations. Appropriate screens such as but not limited
to cytogenetic and molecular assays should be incorporated as a part of the
characterization of cells.
6.1.8 All products intended for administration in humans shall be properly labelled and
fulfil the laid down acceptance, release and stability criteria. All procedures shall
be well laid down in writing and strictly followed to provide reproducible
production of large quantities of well-defined clinical grade cells which meet the
desired standards of identity, purity, safety, potency and traceability. The
laboratory shall be duly accredited or certified, and file the CMC (Chemistry,
Manufacturing and Control) documents for regulatory purposes and necessary
approvals.
6.2 Restricted Areas of Research
6.2.1 Creation of a human zygote by IVF, SCNT or any other method with the specific
aim of deriving ES cell line for any purpose. This shall require the following:
6.2.1.1 The proposed research cannot be carried out with existing ES cell lines, or
those that can be derived from spare embryos;
6.2.1.2 Minimum numbers of embryos/blastocysts required for this research are
clearly defined;
6.2.1.3 Research teams involved have appropriate expertise and training in
derivation, characterization and culture of ESCs.
6.2.2 Clinical trials using cells derived from the differentiation of human ES or iPS cells,
or any stem cell after major manipulation (as defined under Clause 6.1.6.3) shall
require approval of DCGI after obtaining approval fromNAC-SCRT through IC-SCR
and IEC. 
10
6.2.3 Clinical trials sponsored by multinationals, employing cell products developed
outside India, will also need prior approval from DCGI through IC-SCR and IEC.
6.2.4 International collaborative research projects should get clearance from the
respective funding agencies as per their established procedure e.g. Health
Ministry’s Screening Committee (HMSC).
6.2.5 The imports of biological materials for research and development is regulated by
Government of India vide their notification (No. L./950/53/97-H1 (Pt.) dated 19th
Nov 1997.
6.2.6 Import of ‘drugs’ (therapeutic products – including cells) requires license from
the DCGI as per the regulations.
6.2.7 Research involving introduction of human ES / iPS / SS cells into animals
(including primates), at embryonic or foetal stages of development for studies on
pattern of differentiation and integration of human cells into non-human animal
tissues shall conform to the following:
6.2.7.1 If there is a possibility that human stem cells could contribute in a major way
to the development of brain or gonads of the recipient animal, the scientific
justification for the experiments must be substantiated. Animals derived
from these experiments shall not be allowed to breed.
6.2.7.2 Such proposals would need approval of the NAC-SCRT for additional oversight
and review through IAEC and IC-SCR.
6.2.8 Studies on chimeras where stem cells from two or more species are mixed at any
stage of development viz., embryonic, foetal or postnatal, for studies on pattern
of development and differentiation would require prior approval of NAC-SCRT
through IC-SCR and IAEC.
6.2.9 Research in which the identity of the donors of blastocysts, gametes, or somatic
cells from which the human ES/iPS cells were derived is readily ascertainable or
could become known to the investigator would also require prior approval of
NAC-SCRT through IC-SCR and IEC.
6.3 Prohibited Areas of Research
In the current state of our scientific and technological understanding, research in the
following areas is prohibited:
6.3.1 Research related to human germ line gene therapy and reproductive cloning.
6.3.2 In vitro culture of intact human embryos, regardless of the method of their
derivation, beyond 14 days of fertilization or formation of primitive streak,
whichever is earlier.
11
6.3.3 Clinical trials involving transfer of xenogeneic cells into a human host. Any
clinical research on Xenogeneic-Human hybrids is also prohibited.
6.3.4 Research involving implantation of human embryos (generated by any means)
into uterus after in vitro manipulation, at any stage of development, in humans
or primates.
6.3.5 Breeding of animals in which any type of human stem cells have been introduced
at any stage of development, and are likely to contribute to gonadal cells.
7.0 Responsibility for Conduct of Stem Cell Research (of Investigator, Institution
and Sponsor):
7.1 The investigators and institutions where stem cell research is being conducted bear
the ultimate responsibility of ensuring that research activities are in accordance with
the national regulations and guidelines. In particular, scientists whose research
involves human ES cells should work closely with monitoring/regulatory bodies,
demonstrate respect for autonomy and privacy of those who donate gametes,
blastocysts, embryos or somatic cells for stem cell research, and be sensitive to
public concerns about research that involves human embryos. Those working with
human iPS cells shall be particularly careful with the vectors and genes used for
induction of stemness against malignant transformation. Sponsors shall also take
note of their responsibilities and liabilities under various statutes, regulations and
guidelines governing research and development in this field in the country.
7.2 The regulatory bodies shall appreciate that stem cell research is a nascent field.
While there have been tremendous advances in understanding the biology of stem
cells, there exist several elements of unpredictability in the translation of research in
this area. It is of utmost importance that review of research in this field ensures
highest degree of scientific rigor and resolution of ethical concerns. Members of the
regulatory committee shall regularly update their knowledge with regards to
advances in the field.
7.3 Each institution shall maintain a register of its investigators conducting stem cell
research and ensure that all registered users are kept up to date with existing
guidelines and regulations regarding the use of these cells. It shall also be the
responsibility of the institution to ensure that most current standards are applied.
7.4 Each institution shall constitute an IC-SCR as provided in these guidelines and
provide adequate support for its functioning. All records pertaining to clinical adult
stem cell research must be maintained for a period of at least 5 years and those for
ES/iPS cell research for atleast10 years.
12
7.5 The physician/scientist engaged in stem cell research shall endeavour to avoid any
activity that leads to unnecessary hype, or unrealistic expectations in the minds of
study subjects or public at large regarding stem cell therapy. The study subject and
other responsible family members must be given adequate and unbiased
information about the trial protocol, its limitations and potential adverse effects.
They must also be informed about the given indication for therapy. The
investigator’s responsibility is to generate robust scientific evidence through good
clinical trials which may then be applied for the benefit of the patients.
7.6 The institutions conducting stem cell research shall establish suitable mechanisms
for creating awareness and communicating scientific evidences to the public.
7.7 The basic scientists engaged in human stem cell research shall be vigilant to
safeguard rights and dignity of human donors and aborted foetuses from who
samples for research have been obtained. The biological material should be treated
with utmost respect and care in all experiments. The use of human embryos shall be
restricted as much as possible, and shall be resorted to where there are no other
alternatives. Also, special care should be taken in introducing human cells in animals,
particularly in early developmental stages, which may lead to development of
chimeras or incorporation into brain/gonads.
7.8 Several types of research with pluripotent stem cells in the present state of our
knowledge and understanding are prohibited (clause 6.3). Guidelines in this
document should be strictly complied with, regardless of the arguments of potential
benefits that can come from such research.
8.0 Mechanism for Review and Regulatory Oversight of Stem Cell Research
In recent years, the area of stem cell research has undergone rapid developments
promising new leads in the treatment of several incurable diseases. Research in the
field is associated with unique ethical, legal and social issues that require additional
oversight and expertise for efficient scientific and ethical evaluation. Hence, a
separate mechanism for review and monitoring is essential both at the institutional
as well as the national level. A National Apex Committee for Stem Cell Research and
Therapy (NAC-SCRT) will monitor and oversee activities at national level and
Institutional Committee for Stem Cell Research (IC-SCR) at institutional level. The
composition, functions and responsibilities of NAC-SCRT and IC-SCR are given in
Annexure I. These oversight committees shall ensure that review, approval and
monitoring of all research projects in the field of stem cell research is done rigorously
and effectively as per the national guidelines.
13
8.1 All institutes engaged in stem cell research must establish an Institutional Committee
for Stem Cell Research (IC-SCR) with necessary expertise in the field as detailed in
Annexure I. Alternatively, IC-SCR can be constituted by inducting additional expertise
in the existing IEC with the nomenclature as IC-SCR, as per the requirement of these
guidelines. The IC-SCR shall discharge all its function as envisaged under these
guidelines.
8.2 All institutions and investigators, both public and private, carrying out research on
human stem cells should be registered with the NAC-SCRT through IC-SCR.
8.3 Research using human stem cells shall have prior approval of IC-SCR for permitted
research and of the NAC-SCRT for restricted research.
8.4 All new human pluripotent stem cell lines, irrespective of the source and
methodology used, can be created with prior approval of IC-SCR. However, the use
of human embryonic and iPS cells in clinical trials shall have prior approval of the
NAC-SCRT. The requirements for taking decisions regarding creation of embryos for
the purpose of establishment of stem cell lines are given in details in these
guidelines (Clause 6.1.3 and 6.2.1).
8.5 Permission for procurement of human embryonic stem cell lines from abroad or
from laboratories/banks in India shall be obtained from IC-SCR. Import must follow
the guidelines as per Clause 6.2.5.The investigator shall ensure that imported cell
line has been established in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the country of
origin which are comparable to Indian guidelines. An appropriate MTA shall be
adopted for the purpose.
8.6 All clinical trials with SSCs, other than those with genetic modifications, shall have
prior approval of IC-SCR and Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC). Clinical trials using
genetically modified SSCs, and ES or iPS cells or derivatives should have prior
approval from the NAC-SCRT after obtaining clearance from IC-SCR and IEC.
8.7 All clinical trials using cells that have undergone more than minimal manipulation
(Clause 6.1.6.2) shall have to obtained approval from IC-SCR, IEC and DCGI.
8.8 Approval of the Drug Controller General of India (DCGI) is mandatory for stem cell
based IND products and application for new indications (cells for therapies are
deemed as drugs) with prior clearance from IC-SCR and IEC.
8.9 For market authorization of stem cell derived products, all clinical trials approved by
the DCGI shall be registered with the Clinical Trials Registry of India established by
ICMR. (http://ctri.nic.in/Clinicaltrials/login.php).
8.10 International collaborations shall have prior approval of respective funding agency as
per its procedure or Health Ministry’s Screening Committee (HMSC). 
14
9.0 Basic Research
9.1 Derivation and Characterization of Human Pluripotent Stem Cells: General
Considerations
9.1.1 All human ESC lines to be used for basic research should be in accordance with
the details provided under Clause 6.1.3 of this document. Human iPSC lines to be
used for basic research should be registered with IC-SCR.
9.1.2 Derivation of new ES or iPS cell lines from human embryonic or somatic cells
respectively, shall adhere to the conditions for gamete, embryo and somatic cell
donation as laid down in these guidelines (Section 13), and with prior approval
(Clause 6.1.3).
9.2 Basic Stem Cell Biology:
9.2.1 Research on human ESCs and iPSC to increase knowledge about embryo
development, infertility treatment causes of miscarriage and birth defects and
improving contraception techniques.
9.2.2 Developing methods to detect abnormalities in embryos before implantation.
9.2.3 Developing human disease models (generation of disease specific iPSC) to
understand pathophysiological mechanisms at cellular and molecular level.
9.2.4 Developing targeted therapies for genetic and developmental diseases
9.2.5 Developing in vitro cell culture systems of stem cells and their progenitors during
different stages of cell differentiation for drug discovery and toxicity screening
9.2.6 Advancing current understanding of novel cell-based therapies by studying
distribution, differentiation, integration, functioning and survival of implanted
cells in experimental animals
9.2.7 Understanding mechanisms responsible for stemness, role of niche, dormancy,
recruitment, plasticity and the ability to repair and regenerate
9.2.8 Pre-clinical evaluation of safety and efficacy of cell products developed as new
drugs
9.2.8.1 All in vitro studies that fall in the permitted category of research (Clause 6.1).
9.2.8.2 Studies carried out on established human stem cell lines registered with the
IC-SCR/NAC-SCRT (where no direct contact is required with human subjects
to obtain cells), and approved by the scientific review committee may be 
15
exempted from obtaining fresh informed consent by IC-SCR/IEC. Necessary
GLP guidelines shall however be followed.
9.2.8.3 Studies performed on cells/tissues directly obtained from human subjects,
shall require approval from the IC-SCR and IEC before their initiation.
9.2.8.4 In vivo studies on experimental animals (other than primates) that fall in the
permitted category should be in accordance with Clause 6.1.2.
9.2.8.5 Studies on chimeras and sub-human primates shall follow Clause 6.2.5.
9.2.9 No in vitro studies on pre-implantation human embryos shall be carried out
beyond 14 days of fertilization or formation of primitive streak, whichever is
earlier. Similarly no in vitro manipulated cells shall be implanted in
human/animal uterus with the intent of developing a whole organism.
10.0 Translational Research including Clinical Trials Using Stem Cells
This section outlines guidelines for both preclinical studies and clinical trials using
stem cells and their derivatives, for repair or regeneration of damaged tissues and
organs in situations where application of this mode of therapy has not yet reached
an accepted standard of medical care. It involves translational research for
generating a safe and effective novel product based on fundamental research that
can be taken to the bedside. Besides the scientific, technical and entrepreneurial
challenges, it is necessary to address the ethical, social, and regulatory issues
associated with this emerging branch of medicine.
In case stem cells are being delivered using implantable or injectable scaffolds,
guidelines given in Section 11 should additionally be followed.
10.1 Preclinical
Preclinical studies are essential to establish safety and proof-of-principle, prior to
conduct of human clinical trials, as per regulatory requirements for any new
biological entity (NBE). These studies involve both in vitro and/or experiments using
animal model systems. The latter are usually carried out in small animals, with or
without immuno-suppression to prevent cell rejection. Only in specific situations and
depending on the nature of the study, large animals and/or non-human primates
maybe used with prior permission (Clause 10.1.3).
16
10.1.1 Preclinical studies shall demonstrate safety of the product and the procedure, as
well as the proof-of-principle for achieving desired therapeutic effects. The stem
cells to be employed in such trials shall be well characterized, similar to the ones
to be used in clinical trials, and evaluated both for early and late toxicities
including immunogenicity and tumorigenicity.
10.1.2 Diseased human tissues can be permitted for in vitro preclinical studies.
10.1.3 Approval and Monitoring: Preclinical studies shall be approved by IC-SCR and IEC
following independent peer review. Approval from IAEC and CPCSEA shall also be
obtained for studies involving small and large animals respectively.
10.1.4 Study Design:
10.1.4.1 The stem cells shall be well characterized and the source, dose and route of
their administration (local/systemic) shall be clearly defined appropriate to
the proposed clinical application. The final product to be administered must
be a clinical grade product prepared in a rolling cGMP facility.
10.1.4.2 Besides routine safety studies, distribution of cells, their survival,
integration and functional outcome should be evaluated in animal models
wherever possible.
10.1.4.3 Large animal models/non-human primates maybe used wherever necessary
for example studies involving cardiac physiology; tissue-related
inflammatory and immunological injuries and degenerative disorders of
weight bearing joints etc. The selected animal model should offer an
appropriate context for studying the human disease and conditions of
specific interest.
10.1.4.4 For products seeking market authorization, preclinical toxicity studies shall
be done in a certified GLP facility.
10.1.4.5 The interaction of stem cells with drugs (including immuno-suppressants
wherever relevant) to treat the underlying medical condition shall be tested
in animal model/cell culture systems.
10.1.4.6 Study design shall preferably incorporate a plan to analyse potential
toxicities arising due to abnormalities acquired during in vitro processing
10.1.5 It is recognized that preclinical assays in animal models may not accurately
predict the nature of cell behaviour and immune response in humans.
17
10.2 Clinical Research/Trial
Clinical trials using human stem cells should be in compliance with Schedule Y of
Drugs and Cosmetics Act and GCP Guidelines of CDSCO (www.cdsco.nic.in) as well as
ICMR-Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research involving Human Participants
(http://www.icmr.nic.in/ethical_guidelines.pdf). Clinical trial protocol shall be
formulated as per the format given in Annexure II.
10.2.1 Reagents used for the derivation of human ES or iPS cell lines, or
expansion/enrichment of SSCs, for purposes of clinical trials should be of clinicalgrade.
10.2.2 Trial Subjects: Subject selection shall be done according to the predefined
inclusion and exclusion criteria, as laid down in the approved clinical research
protocol.
10.2.2.1 The patient information sheet and the informed consent form shall
specifically address the following:
a. Information regarding the present status of use of stem cells in the given
condition, experimental nature of the proposed clinical study and its
possible short and long term risks.
b. Information stating irreversibility of the intervention.
c. Information regarding source and characteristics of stem cells and degree
of their ex vivo manipulation, if any.
d. Information on the established standard of care for a given condition
e. Information on the sample size and duration of study
f. The information sheet and the consent form should be approved by IEC
and IC-SCR and the same should be clearly mentioned in these
documents.
10.2.3 Approval and Monitoring:
Approval and monitoring of clinical trials will take into consideration the
following factors but not limited to:
10.2.3.1 Source and type of stem cells- somatic, embryonic, iPSC etc.
10.2.3.2 Autologous or allogeneic application 
18
10.2.3.3 Degree of manipulation: minimal, substantial (more than minimal), or major
(Clause 6.1.6)
10.2.3.4 Stage of research –in vitro, in vivo, preclinical or clinical
10.2.3.5 Whether the proposed cell based research is intended for developing a
marketable product or an academic institutional research for advancement
of knowledge
10.2.4 Regulatory Approvals:
10.2.4.1 All clinical trials using stem cells shall be registered with CTRI
http://ctri.nic.in/Clinicaltrials/login.php
10.2.4.2 Clinical trial proposals using minimally manipulated autologous SSCs shall
be approved by IC-SCR and IEC.
10.2.4.3 Clinical trials using stem cells with substantial manipulation shall be
approved by DCGI after obtaining clearance from IC-SCR and IEC.
10.2.4.4 Clinical trials using allogeneic SSCs (with any degree of manipulation) or
autologous SSCs with major manipulation shall be approved by DCGI after
obtaining clearance from NAC-SCRT through IC-SCR and IEC.
10.2.4.5 Clinical trials using human ES cells (or their derivatives) shall be approved
by DCGI after obtaining clearance from NAC-SCRT through IC-SCR and IEC.
10.2.4.6 Any stem cell based product already approved and marketed outside India
(or for concurrent clinical trial in India) will require approval of DCGI
through IC-SCR and IEC for pre-license clinical trial.
10.2.4.7 Any clinical trial with a product intended to be licensed and marketed shall
have prior approval of DCGI through IC-SCR and IEC.
10.2.5 Monitoring of Clinical Trials:
10.2.5.1 All clinical trials using stem cells involving human subjects shall be
monitored by IEC and IC-SCR. All cases of adverse events should be
reported to the Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB), NAC-SCRT and
Funding Agency/Sponsor.
10.2.5.2 Institutes involved in clinical trials using stem cells should constitute
separate DSMB for each trial, as appropriate. 
19
10.2.5.3 DSMB shall have the requisite expertise to monitor trials for adverse events
and their smooth conduct.
10.2.5.4 Members of the DSMB shall not have any conflict of interest with the study
and they should not be associated with IC-SCR/IEC.
10.2.5.5 The IC-SCR and IEC shall ensure that the subjects recruited under clinical
trial shall not be charged.
10.2.5.6 The institution and/or sponsor conducting clinical trials shall be responsible
for insurance and compensation of the subjects recruited under the trial
10.3 Use of Stem Cells for Therapeutic Purposes
10.3.1 At present, there are no approved indications for stem cell therapy other than
the hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) for haematological disorders.
Accordingly all stem cell therapy other than the above shall be treated as
investigational and conducted only in the form of a clinical trial after obtaining
necessary regulatory approvals. Use of stem cells for any other purpose outside
the domain of clinical trial will be considered unethical and hence is not
permissible.
10.3.2 Cells used in clinical trials must be of clinical grade and processed under rolling
GTP/GMP standards as considered necessary by the IC-SCR and NAC-SCRT.
10.3.3 The product for transplantation to be used for clinical trial shall be free from
animal products and microbial contamination.
10.3.4 Centres carrying out stem cell clinical trials and the agency/ source providing
such cells for the trial shall be registered with the NAC-SCRT through IC-SCR.
10.3.5 For International Collaboration, the public funding agency evaluating the study
or the Health Ministry’s Screening Committee shall ensure that the certification
provided by the collaborating country fulfils the requirements as laid down in
these guidelines.
10.3.6 For a trial protocol to become an approved therapy, the investigator shall apply
to the NAC-SCRT with the data on which such a claim is based and a justification
for the same. The NAC-SCRT will then determine, in independent consultation
with experts in the field, whether such a claim may be approved.
11.0 Tissue Engineering and Scaffolds in Stem Cell Research
Tissue engineering is an emerging area of biomedical research with the primary goal 
20
of repair/regeneration and restoration of functions of the damaged tissue that fail to
heal spontaneously by using cells, growth factors and natural or synthetic scaffolds
either alone or in combination. Scaffolds act as the artificial extracellular matrix
(ECM), which provide structural support for the cells as they expand and guide their
growth in a three-dimensional (3D) space into a specific tissue. To guide the
organization, growth, and differentiation of cells in tissue-engineered constructs, the
scaffold should be able to provide not only physical support for the cells but also the
chemical and biological cues required for function restoration.
An ideal scaffold should possess all the qualities of a native ECM, be biocompatible
and should provide a 3D template for the cells to attach and guide their growth. It
should have a porous architecture with a high surface area allowing for maximum
loading of cells, cell-matrix interaction, tissue in growth and transportation of
nutrients and oxygen. It should be mechanically strong to withstand local in vivo
biological forces but biodegradable. However, the degradation rate should match
the rate of regeneration. It should be made of material that can be sterilized without
compromising any structural or functional properties. Most importantly, it should
allow the cells it supports to perform intended functions. The manufacturing process
of scaffold with all the above unique characteristics must be accomplished in a
practical, reproducible and scalable manner.
The detailed guidelines for the use of scaffolds in stem cell research are beyond the
scope of this document. The investigator is advised to refer to the following:
http://www.astm.org/Standards/F2150.htm
http://www.astm.org/Standards/F2450.htm
http://www.astm.org/Standards/F2027.htm
http://www.astm.org/Standards/F2739.htm
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfstandards/detail.cfm?standard__identification_no=28650
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfstandards/detail.cfm?standard__identification_no=28653
12.0 Banking of Umbilical Cord Blood and Other Biological Tissues Including Cell
Lines:
12.1 Procurement and banking of various biological tissues such as umbilical cord blood,
placenta, extracted tooth, adipose tissue and other sources of stem cells with the
specific objective of their isolation and/or ex vivo expansion is increasingly becoming 
21
a commercial activity. However, care needs to be taken such that there is no
exploitation and commoditization of these resources. Each proposal for banking or
for academic application of the banked tissue shall be carefully examined by the ICSCR and IEC from the ethical angle to ensure access, equity and justice. Use of the
banked material for commercial purposes may require national consultation
regarding intellectual property rights of the donor.
12.2 Banking of Umbilical Cord Blood
12.2.1 Umbilical cord blood is a rich source of CD34+ hematopoietic and mesenchymal
(stromal) stem cells. The use of the HSC for treatment of various haematological
and immunological disorders is currently well established, particularly where an
HLA-matched sibling is not available for HSC donation. To meet this demand,
several public (untargeted, non-profit) umbilical cord blood banks have become
established all over the world. Such banks are permitted to be established in
India, so long as they are licensed by the CDSCO and fulfil the requirements laid
down by it. As far as collection and distribution policy and procedure of the
umbilical cord blood units for HSCT is concerned, they should follow the standard
practices. However, any other use of cord blood stem cells, HSC or MSC is
experimental at present and shall be permitted only under conditions of
controlled clinical trial by the IC-SCR/IEC or NAC-SCRT through the IC-SCR as
required under the provisions of these guidelines.
12.2.2 All cord blood banks must be licensed and monitored by the CDSCO. They should follow
the Drugs and Cosmetics (3rd Amendment) Rules, 2011 (Gazette Notification No. GSR
899(E) dated 27/12/2011) for collection, processing, testing, storage, banking, and
release of umbilical cord blood (http://cdsco.nic.in/html/GSR%20899.pdf).
There are ethical concerns about the promotional advertisements by private
banks offering storage of cord blood for possible future use. Such advertisements
are often misleading for the public and lack comprehensive and
accurate information to the consumer. It may be mentioned that there is no
scientific basis for preservation of cord blood for future self-use and this practice
is not recommended. On the other hand, parents should be encouraged for
voluntary donation to public cord blood banks for allogeneic transplantation and
research purposes. In such cases, ID cards should be issued by the banks, to the
donor to enable preferential access/benefits to donor/relatives, in future.
12.2.3 Precautions for collection of umbilical cord blood for stem cells
The following points should specifically be considered while collecting UCB:
22
12.2.3.1 No harm should occur to the donor neonate.
12.2.3.2 Exact timing of clamping the umbilical cord should be defined in the SOP and
recorded in the case file.
12.2.3.3 Parents should be fully informed regarding risks and benefits involved.
12.2.3.4 Voluntary informed consent should be obtained from both parents well
before the scheduled delivery date, but in no case at the time of delivery. If
there is disagreement between parents, the mother’s wish shall prevail.
12.2.3.5 ID card should be issued for voluntary donation to enable preferential access/
benefit in future, in case required for self/ relatives. Such units may also be
used for unrelated individuals.
12.2.3.6 Standard operating Procedures for collection, transportation, processing,
storage (cryopreservation) and release for clinical use of umbilical cord
blood/ cells should be clearly laid down and approved by IC-SCR and IEC.
12.2.3.7 If stem cells are proposed to be processed before use (without major
manipulation), detailed protocol for their isolation, expansion, and
characterization should be approved by IC-SCR and IEC. If any major
manipulation is envisaged, the approval should also be taken from the NACSCRT.
12.2.3.8 Period of preservation for self-use later in life should be clearly defined.
12.2.3.9 Detailed SOPs for release of umbilical cord units for clinical use should be in
place. This should include follow up plans to monitor the outcome of HSCT
for assessing safety and efficacy of cord blood stem cell therapy.
12.3 Banking and Distribution of Human ES/iPS Cell Lines
As human ES/iPS cell research advances, it will be increasingly important for
institutions that obtain store and use stem cell lines to have confidence in the value
of stored cells. For this purpose, it is necessary to ensure that:
i. They are well characterized and screened for infectious disease markers and
ii. They are maintained and stored as per current standards of GLP/GTP/GMP
with appropriate SOPs.
The following guidelines are specifically adapted for human ES/iPS stem cell lines.
However researchers are advised and expected to keep track of advances in the
field.
12.3.1 Institutions that are banking or plan to bank human ES/iPS stem cell lines should
establish uniform guidelines to ensure that donors of biological material give
informed consent through a process approved by the IC-SCR and IEC and 
23
meticulous records are maintained about all aspects of cell culture. Uniform
tracking systems and guidelines for distribution of cells should be established as
per accepted standard procedures.
12.3.2 Any facility engaged in obtaining and storing human ES/iPS stem cell lines should
follow the standard practices. These include:
12.3.2.1 Creation of clear and standardized protocols for banking and withdrawals.
12.3.2.2 Documentation requirements for investigators and sites that deposit cell
lines, including:
a. A copy of the donor consent form.
b. Proof of IC-SCR and IEC approval for the procurement process.
c. Available medical information on donors, along with infectious
disease screening details.
d. Available clinical, observational or other diagnostic information about
the donor.
e. Personal information anonymised (such that the identity cannot be
frivolously disclosed), but traceable if required.
f. Critical information about culture conditions (such as media,
additives, cell passage, and safety information).
g. Available cell line characterization (such as but not limited to cluster
differentiation (CD) phenotyping, karyotyping and genetic markers).
12.3.2.3 A repository has the right of refusal if prior culture conditions or other
items do not meet its standards.
12.3.3 A secure system for protecting the privacy of donors where the material is
assigned a unique code and all other identifiable information is stored securely at
the source of origin, with details on the following:
12.3.3.1 Plans for maintaining confidentiality (such as a coding system).
12.3.3.2 A secure system for inventory track from primary cell lines to those
submitted to the repository and their subsequent use.
12.3.3.3 A policy governing whether and how to deliver clinically significant
information obtained through research/investigations back to donors.
12.3.4 The following Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)/ Standard of practices
should be defined and maintained:
12.3.4.1 Assignment of a unique identifier to each sample. 
24
12.3.4.2 Procedure for derivation of stem cell lines
12.3.4.3 Process for characterizing cell lines.
12.3.4.4 Process for expanding, maintaining, and storing cell lines.
12.3.4.5 System for quality assurance and control.
12.3.4.6 Website that contains scientific descriptions and data related to the
available stem cell lines.
12.3.4.7 Procedure for reviewing request applications for deposit/requisition of cell
lines.
12.3.4.8 Process for tracking disbursed cell lines and recording their status when
shipped (such as number of passages).
12.3.4.9 System for auditing compliance.
12.3.4.10 Schedule of charges.
12.3.4.11 Statement of intellectual property policies.
12.3.4.12 When appropriate, creation of a clear Material Transfer Agreement or user
agreement.
12.3.4.13 Liability statement.
12.3.4.14 System for disposal of material.
12.3.4.15 Clear criteria for distribution of cell lines
12.3.4.16 An approved Release Certificate to be issued with each dispatch
13.0 Procurement of Biological Material for Research:
Procurement of biological material as a source of stem cells for basic or translational
research is permissible subject to approval by IC-SCR and IEC. The biological material
includes foetal and placental tissues, as well as gametes, blastocysts and somatic
cells.
13.1 Foetal /Placental Tissue
For procurement of foetal or placental tissue as a source of stem cells, the following
guidelines should be adhered to:
13.1.1 Termination of pregnancy (TOP) should comply with all obligations under the
MTP Act. However, TOP with a view to donate foetal tissue in return for financial
or any other inducement is not permissible. 
25
13.1.2 Informed consent for donation
13.1.2.1 Independent informed consent should be obtained for termination of
pregnancy and for donation of the foetal material for research.
13.1.2.2 The consent for donation of foetal tissue should be obtained in advance and
not just before or at the time of the procedure. The parent should be given
sufficient time to take decision regarding the donation.
13.1.2.3 The consent for donation should include permission for screening of the
donor for transmissible infections and obtaining family history of genetic
disorders.
13.1.3 The purpose and use of donated foetal tissue should be fully explained to the
parents. It should not be vague and open ended. The information sheet for the
purpose should be carefully scrutinized and vetted by the IC-SCR and IEC.
13.1.4 The medical person responsible for care of the pregnant woman willing to
undergo termination of pregnancy and the investigator using the foetal material
shall not be the same.
13.1.5 The donor shall not have the option to specify the use of the donated material
for a particular person or in a particular manner.
13.1.6 The identity of the donor should be kept confidential. Personal information of
the donor, however, should be kept available for traceability in situations where
the cells derived from the donated foetal tissue are proposed to be used for
therapy.
13.2 Gametes, Blastocysts (Pre-implantation Embryos) or Somatic Cells for Generation
of Human ES/iPS Cell Lines
13.2.1 The IC-SCR and IEC, should review and approve the process of procurement of
gametes, blastocysts, or somatic cells for the purpose of generating new human
ES/iPScell lines. IC-SCR and IEC should verify that the blastocysts obtained from
infertility clinics are in excess (spare embryos) of the clinical need of the couple.
13.2.2 Creation of human ES cell lines from blastocysts and iPS cell lines from somatic
cells should be approved by IC-SCR and IEC. However, creation of the same 
26
through IVF or other methods, specifically for research purposes, should have
prior approval of NAC-SCRT through IC-SCR and IEC.
13.2.3 Consent for donation of blastocysts for establishment of human ES cells lines
should be obtained from the donor at least 24 hours in advance and not at the
time of the donation. Donors should be informed that they retain the right to
withdraw consent until the blastocysts are actually used in cell line derivation.
13.2.4 There should be no inducement for donation of gametes or embryos by way of
payment or in lieu of medical services, except for reimbursement of reasonable
expenses for travel and loss of wages incurred by the person (amount to be
decided by IC-SCR/ IEC). Similarly, no payments should be made for donation of
somatic cells for use in SCNT or creation of iPS cell lines except for
reimbursement towards travel expenses for attending the clinic.
13.2.5 The attending physician responsible for the infertility treatment and the
investigator deriving or proposing to use ES cells shall not be the same individual.
To facilitate autonomy of the donor, decisions related to the creation of embryos
for infertility treatment should be independent of the influence of investigators
who propose to derive or use ES cells in research.
13.2.6 Informed consent for donation should include:
13.2.6.1 A statement that the blastocysts or gametes will be used to derive human
ES cells/cell lines for research purposes.
13.2.6.2 A statement that the donation is made without any restriction or direction
regarding who may be the recipient of transplants of cells derived from it.
13.2.6.3 An assurance that the investigator will follow the ethical practices for
procurement, culture, and storage of cells and tissues.
13.2.6.4 A statement that the derived ES cell line may be used for development of
new drugs/diagnostics or other uses which may have commercial value, but
no direct financial benefit will accrue to the donors.
13.2.6.5 A statement that derived stem cells or cell lines and the information related
to them may be archived for 10 years or more.
13.2.6.6 A statement that research is not intended to provide direct medical benefit
to the donor(s) except in the case of autologous transplantation. 
27
13.2.6.7 A statement that neither consenting nor refusing to donate
gametes/embryos/somatic cells for research will affect the quality of
present or future medical care provided to potential donors.
13.2.6.8 A statement of the risks involved to the oocyte donor and acceptance of
the responsibility to provide appropriate health care and compensation in
case any complication arises during/or anytime after the procedure.
13.2.7 Identity of the donor shall be kept confidential at all times. Wherever traceability
of the stem cells is required, the same shall be kept secured to ensure
confidentiality. The investigator shall also document the process of maintenance
of the confidentiality of any coded or identifiable information associated with the
cell lines.
13.2.8 The IC-SCR and IEC while reviewing and approving the proposals for
gamete/blastocyst/somatic cell donation shall ensure that the subjects do not
belong to vulnerable groups.
13.2.9 There shall be no coercion to undertake human ES cell research or any activity
related to SCR. Autonomy of the researcher/physician must be respected.
14.0 International Collaboration
14.1 National guidelines of respective countries shall be followed.
14.2 All international collaboration will be permitted as per the approved procedure of
funding agencies (DST, DBT, ICMR etc.) or the Health Ministry’s Screening Committee
(as per GOI Guidelines), following joint proposal with appropriate MOU.
14.3 In situation involving a conflict (scientific and/or ethical) between the collaborators,
the Indian ethical guidelines and regulations shall prevail for the work to be carried
out in India.
15.0 Exchange of Biological Material for Research
15.1 All proposals for import/export of stem cells and their derivatives required for
research and development including for clinical trials shall be examined by the ICSCR, and if felt necessary by the NAC-SCRT. After satisfying the scientific and ethical
considerations, the statutory requirements of approval from DCGI and the Govt. of 
28
India’s guidelines (Circular No. L/950/53/97-H1 (Pt.) dated November 19th, 1997 of
the Ministry of Health) on import/export of biological materials should be followed.
15.2 A critical limitation of the use of stem cells for research and development is to
maintain them in a viable state. Since their viability can be affected by X ray –
irradiation, appropriate international guidelines need to be followed for their
packaging, labelling, handling and transport at ports without compromising their
quality.
15.3 Transport of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells from established bone
marrow/cord blood banks for unrelated donor transplantation required for
therapeutic indications should follow the established procedures.
16.0 Public Participation
16.1 An interactive portal on the web shall be created by NAC-SCRT, both for the public as
well as scientists and professionals to provide reliable and up-to-date information
about recent developments in the field. The portal will encourage suggestions and
feedback for continuous improvement.
16.2 To create awareness and update about the stem cells and their applications, periodic
interactions with the public/stakeholders will be held across the country by the
experts and regulators. The focus of such interactive sessions will be to educate the
masses so as to avoid their exploitation and to provide a forum for free and frank
exchange of views.
17.0 Periodic Review of Guidelines
The field of stem cells has seen rapid strides both in basic and translational aspects.
With the unfolding of new developments and knowledge, it is essential to
periodically review and update the guideline document. Accordingly periodic
changes to specific clauses and sections will be notified in the form of amendments.
It is one of the assigned functions of the NAC-SCRT to determine the need and
mechanism for implementing revisions to the document.
29
References for Further Reading
Opinion on Ethical Aspects of Human Stem Cell Research and Use. The European Group on
Ethics. Paris: 2000
www.nap.edu National Academy Press In: Stem Cells and the Future of Regenerative Medicine
2002; Chapter 1: Project Overview and Definitions 7-18
ISSCR Guidelines for the conduct of Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research. Version 1,
December 2008.
ISSCR Guidelines for the Clinical Translation of Stem Cells, December 2008.
National guidelines for DSMB jointly prepared by WHO and CDCSO, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, November, 2007
DSMB guidelines, NIH, USA November, 2011
Regulation (EC) No.1394/2007 of the European Parliament and Council, November, 2007
Requirement and Guidelines on clinical trials for import and manufacture of new drug
Schedule Y, CDSCO
Good clinical practices for clinical research in India, CDSCO
Halme DG, Kessler DA. FDA Regulation of Stem-Cell-Based Therapies. 2006 NEJM 355:1730-
35.
Lee MH, Arcidiacono JA, Bilek AM, Wille, JJ, Hamill CA, Wonnacott KM, Well MA, Oh SS.
Consideration for Tissue-Engineered and Regenerative Medicine Product Development prior
to clinical trials in the United States. 2009 Tissue Engineering Part B DOI:
10.1089/ten.teb.2009.0449
Canadian Institute of Health Research. Updated guidelines for Human Pluripotent Stem Cell
Research, June 30, 2009. http://www.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/e/42071.html 
30
31
Annexure - I
Function of NAC-SCRT and IC-SCR
The National Apex Committee for Stem Cell Research has been established by Department
of Health Research (DHR), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India. The
committee periodically assesses the adequacy of the guidelines proposed in this document
and also provides a forum for continuing discussion of issues involved in hES/hiPS cell
research in the light of ever growing advances in science. The committee also reviews and
approves specific research protocols falling under restricted category or as provided in the
guidelines. It also addresses new unforeseen issues of public interest from time to time. The
body is independent and should be respected by both the lay and scientific communities.
The IC-SCR shall function at the institutional level and have appropriate expertise as
suggested to support this effort, and shall registered with and report to the NAC-SCRT.
1.0 National Apex Committee for Stem Cell Research and Therapy (NAC-SCRT)
This is a multidisciplinary committee with a Secretariat. It will have two main
functions:
a) General oversight of the field of stem cell research and therapy in India and
formulation of policy related to it
b) Review of specific controversial or ethically sensitive research and proposals
for therapeutic use of stem cells/differentiated derivatives
1.1 Scope
1.1.1 The Committee has the responsibility to examine scientific, technical, ethical,
legal and social issues in the area of stem cell or their derivatives based research
and therapy.
1.1.2 Maintain a register of all institutions involved in any type of stem cell research
and therapy including details of their IC-SCR.
1.1.3 Review annual reports of these IC-SCRs for compliance with national guidelines
and ethical practices.
1.1.4 NAC-SCRT shall approve, monitor and oversee research in the restricted areas as
given in this document.
1.1.5 Use of chimeric tissue for research shall be reviewed by NAC-SCRT
1.1.7 NAC-SCRT shall review and update the national guidelines for stem cell research
and therapy periodically, considering scientific developments at the national or
international levels.
1.1.8 NAC-SCRT in collaboration with the CDSCO will set up standards for safety and
quality, quality control, procedures for collection and its schedule, processing or 
32
preparation, expansion, differentiation, preservation for storage, removal from
storage to assure quality of human stem cells or their derivatives.
1.1.9 Respond to queries/ representations from all the stakeholders in the community
(investigators, industry, R&D Institutions, entrepreneurs, media, patient groups,
government agencies etc.)
1.1.10 Respond to controversial issues raised /received from NGOs, patients, individuals
etc., and diverted to NAC-SCRT by other agencies (ICMR, DBT, DST, MCI, DCGI
etc.)
1.1.11 Monitor any unethical practices related to stem cell research and/or therapy
being followed at any organization or any individual and bring them to the notice
of relevant authorities.
1.2 Membership (at least 15)
Committee composition will include Chairman, Alternative Chairman, Member
Secretary, nominees from DBT, DST, CSIR, DSIR, ICMR, DCGI, DAE, MCI, DGHS and
biomedical experts drawn from appropriate disciplines such as Haematology,
Pharmacology, Immunology, Cell Biology, Microbiology, Genetics, Developmental
biology, Clinical medicine and Nursing. Other members would include a legal expert,
social scientist, and women’s representative. In addition consultants/experts could
be consulted / invited for specific topics and advice.
1.3 Frequency of meetings
Quarterly, but can be more frequent, if necessary.
2.0 Institutional committee for Stem Cell Research (IC-SCR)
This is a multidisciplinary body at the institutional level.
2.1 Scope
2.1.1 Institutions involved in stem cell research are required to set-up a special review
board to oversee research (basic science and clinical) in this field.
2.1.2 To be registered with the NAC-SCRT.
2.1.3 Provide overview of all issues related to stem cell research at the institutional
level.
2.1.4 Review and approve the scientific merit of research protocols.
2.1.5 Shall function in compliance with all relevant regulations and guidelines.
2.1.6 Maintain a register of hES cell research conducted at the institution and hES cell
lines derived or imported by institutional investigators and notify NAC-SCRT.
2.1.7 Facilitate training of investigators involved in stem cell research.
2.1.8 Submit annual report to NAC-SCRT. 
33
2.2 Membership (at least 7)
The committee should include representatives of the public and persons with
expertise in clinical medicine, developmental biology, stem cell research, molecular
biology, assisted reproduction technology, and ethical and legal issues in stem cell
research. It should have the resources to coordinate reviews of various protocols.
2.3 Guidelines for the constitution of IC-SCR
2.3.1 The Chairman must have relevant medical/scientific background and be from
outside the institute with no conflict of interest (COI).
2.3.2 Members from Law, Ethics and Social Sciences must be from outside the institute
and with no COI.
2.3.3 Stem cell experts, if possible from outside the institute, can be the
scientific/technical members.
2.3.4 Member Secretary can be from the same institute and must not have any COI.
2.3.5 Any member having COI with a particular proposal must abstain from the
discussion and decision making process of that proposal.
2.3.6 IC-SCR members must be familiar with the current bioethical guidelines and
guidelines for stem cell research.
2.3.7 The quorum should consist of the following members, without which the
decision should not be taken:
2.3.7.a Chairman, and Member Secretary (if not abstaining due to COI)
2.3.7.b Experts from Law, Ethics and Social Sciences
2.3.7.c At least one stem cell expert with appropriate expertise and no COI
2.3.8 A group of institutions may have a common IC-SCR with the approval from head
of each institution if:
2.3.8.a It designates at least one person from each institute as member (with no COI)
2.3.8.b Provides details of that person to NAC-SCRT
2.3.8.c The designated person is present during the discussion of the proposals
submitted by the institute
2.4 Guidelines for framing SOP for functioning of IC-SCR
SOP for functioning of IC-SCR must be framed including, but not limited to, the
following information:
2.4.1 Constitution and functioning of IC-SCR
2.4.2 Terms of reference of members
2.4.3 Detailed review and approval process
34
2.4.4 Frequency of meetings
2.4.5 Monitoring and follow-up of approved projects
2.4.6 Maintenance of records
2.5 The institute under which the IC-SCR functions must ensure that the IC-SCR is always
independent and appropriately competent to review the proposals being submitted
to them.
2.6 It is the responsibility of the IC-SCR to ensure that the research conducted under its
ambit is scientific and ethical.
2.7 The IC-SCRs fulfilling aforesaid guidelines may be registered by the NAC-SCRT.
35
Annexure– II
Clinical Trial Protocol for Stem Cell Therapy
The document should include study title, Phase of the study, Institution conducting the trial,
Sponsor Names of the Principal Investigator and Co-investigators and brief CV of all the
investigators
1. Synopsis of the protocol (Summary)
2. Introduction
3. Study objectives
4. Study plan
a. Study design
b. Number of patients
c. Inclusion criteria
d. Exclusion criteria
e. Chart of schedule of visits and activities at each visit
f. Ethical considerations – risks and benefits
i. Screening phase
ii. Treatment phase
iii. Post –treatment phase
iv. Withdrawal of patients prior to study completion
g. Efficacy assessment
i. Primary efficacy outcome
ii. Secondary efficacy outcome
iii. Efficacy measurements
5. Safety assessment
Adverse Events documentation in a prescribed format
i. Definitions
ii. Documentation of adverse events
iii. Reporting of serious adverse events 
36
6. Concomitant Medications
i. Documentation of medications – name, dose, duration
ii. Intercurrent illness
iii. Prohibited medications
7. Product information, dose scheme and administration instructions
i. Product information
ii. Dose scheme
iii. Route of administration
iv. Cell preparation and administration instructions
8. Data evaluation/statistics
a. Sample size determination
b. Study population analyses
c. Efficacy analysis/methods
d. Safety analysis/methods
e. Adverse events
f. Clinical laboratory studies
9. Ethical and Administrative Issues
a. Informed consent from Patient /Parent/Relative
b. Institutional Review Board Approval
c. Data and safety monitoring board
d. Adherence to the protocol
e. Protocol amendment approval
f. Data collection, source documentation and retention of patient records
g. Accountability of Investigational drug/product
h. Monitoring of the study and audit
i. Retention of patient Records
j. IPR issues: (patent obtained/filed
10. Requirements for study initiation and completion
11. Confidentiality and publication
12. Enclosures 
37
I. Investigator brochure including background, rationale, product details, pre-clinical
study results, human trials, references and publication list and reprints
II. Case Record Form
III. Manual for efficacy assessments, safety assessments, laboratory procedures etc.
IV. Administrative approvals from the following:
a. DCGI for IND/NDA
b. IEC (of each centre)
c. Approved patient information sheet and consent form
d. IC-SCR and NAC-SCRT as applicable
e. MOU/MTA in case of National/International collaboration with transfer of
biological materials
f. Funding of the project/sponsor
g. Conflict of interest declaration
h. Incentives to investigators/patients/donors
i. Post-trial benefits
j. Medical insurance coverage for SAEs
k. Sponsor’s responsibility towards cost of trial/complications
l. Investigator’s bio-data/acceptance 
38
39
Glossary
Adult stem cell: (also known as somatic stem cell): A relatively rare undifferentiated cell
found in many organs and differentiated tissues with a limited capacity for both selfrenewal (in the laboratory) and differentiation. Such cells vary in their differentiation
capacity, but it is usually limited to cell types in the organ of origin. This is an active
area of investigation.
Blastocyst: a hollow ball of 50-100 cells reached after about 5 days of embryonic
development. It consists of a sphere made up of an outer layer of cells (the
trophoectoderm), a fluid-filled cavity (the blastocoel), and a cluster of cells in the
interior (the inner cell mass)
Bone Marrow: The soft, spongy tissue found in the centre of most large bones
that produces the cellular components of blood which is known as hematopoietic
stem cells (white cells, red cells and platelets). It is also a source of mesenchymal and
endothelial stem cells.
Chimera: An organism, organ, or part consisting of two or more tissues of different genetic
composition, produced as a result of organ transplant, grafting, or genetic
engineering.
Cell line: A cell culture selected for uniformity from a cell population derived from a usually
homogeneous tissue source (as an organ)
Clinical grade: Compatible and certified for administration into humans.
Clinical Research/Trial: is a branch of healthcare science that determines the safety and
effectiveness of medications, devices, diagnostic products and treatment
regimens intended for human use. These may be used for prevention, treatment,
diagnosis or for relieving symptoms of a disease. Clinical Research is different than
clinical practice. In clinical practice one uses established treatments, while in clinical
research evidence is collected to establish a treatment.
Clone: a cell or organism derived from and genetically identical to another cell or organism
Clonal: cells derived from a single parent cell
Cloning: The process of creating genetically identical copy of a biological unit (e.g. a DNA
sequence, cell, or organism) from which it was derived, especially by way of
biotechnological methods.
 Cloning by somatic cell nuclear transfer: involves replacing an oocyte’s nucleus
with the nucleus of the adult cell to be cloned (or from an embryo or foetus) and
then activating oocyte’s further development without fertilization. The oocyte
genetically reprograms the transferred nucleus, enabling it to direct 
40
development of a whole new organism
 Reproductive cloning: The embryo developed after Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer
(SCNT) is implanted into the uterus (of the donor of the ovum or a surrogate
recipient) and allowed to develop into a foetus and whole organism. The
organism so developed is genetically identical to the donor of the somatic cell
nucleus.
 Therapeutic cloning: The development of the embryo after Somatic Cell Nuclear
Transfer (SCNT) is stopped at the blastocyst stage and embryonic stem cells are
derived from the inner cell mass. These stem cells could be differentiated into
desired tissue using a cocktail of growth and differentiation factors. The
generated tissue/cells could then be transplanted into the original donor of the
nucleus avoiding rejection.
Consent: A process by which a subject voluntarily confirms his or her (or their next of
kin/legal heir) willingness to participate in a particular study/clinical trial, after
having been informed of the aims, methods, required data collection procedures and
schedule, anticipated benefits and potential hazards of the study and the discomfort
it may entail. Informed consent is documented by means of a written, signed and
dated informed consent form. The consent besides being voluntary and informed
has to be without any coercion or inducement. It can be withheld, or even
withdrawn at any time, without giving any reason or prejudice to present or future
treatment of the individual.
Cord blood stem cell: Stem cells isolated from the umbilical cord blood collected at the time
of birth. Cord blood contains hematopoietic and mesenchymal (stromal) stem cells.
Cord blood is currently used to treat patients who have undergone chemotherapy to
destroy their bone marrow due to cancer or other blood-related disorders.
Differentiation: The process whereby an unspecialized embryonic cell acquires the features
of a specialized cell such as a heart, liver, or muscle cell. Differentiation is controlled
by the interaction of a cell's genes with the physical and chemical conditions outside
the cell, usually through signalling pathways involving proteins embedded in the cell
surface.
Early embryo: The term “early embryo” covers stages of development up to the appearance
of primitive streak i.e., until 14 days after fertilization.
Embryonic germ cell: Embryonic germ cells are primordial germ cells isolated from the
gonadal ridge of 5-10 weeks foetus (those that would become sperm and eggs).
Embryonic stem cell: cells derived from the inner cell mass up to the stage of blastocysts.
These cells can be cultured indefinitely under in vitro conditions that allow
proliferation without differentiation, but have the potential of differentiating into 
41
any cell of the three germinal layers of the body.
Feeder layer: cells used in co-culture to maintain pluripotent nature of the stem cells
Fetus: In humans, it is a developing stage from eight weeks after conception till birth
Fetal stem cell: Stem cells derived from foetal tissue including placenta that retain the
ability to divide, proliferate and provide progenitor cells that can differentiate into
specialized cells. A distinction is drawn between the foetal germ cells, from which
the gametes develop, and foetal somatic cells, from which rest of the organism
develops.
Gamete: A mature male or female reproductive cell usually possessing a haploid
chromosome set and capable of initiating formation of a new diploid individual by
fusion with a gamete of the opposite sex. An egg (in the female) and sperm (in the
male).
Germ cells: ova and sperm, and their precursors
Hematopoietic stem cell: A stem cell that gives rise to all red and white blood cells and
platelets.
Human Embryo: It is developing stage between the times of fertilization until the end of the
eighth week of gestation, after which it is known as a foetus.
Implantation: The embedding of a blastocyst in the wall of uterus. In humans implantation
takes place between 7-14 days after fertilization.
Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell (iPSC): These are adult differentiated cells that have been
genetically reprogrammed to an embryonic stem cell–like state by being forced to
express genes and factors important for maintaining the properties of pluripotent
stem cells.
In vitro: Of processes or reactions taking place in a test tube, culture dish, or elsewhere
outside a living organism.
In vivo: Of processes taking place in a living organism
Mesenchymal stem cells: Is multipotent progenitor cells that were originally identified in
the bone marrow stroma and now isolated from different sources including umbilical
cord blood and adipose tissue etc.
Multipotent stem cells: The cells have the potential to differentiate into different types of
specialized cells constituting a specific tissue or organ.
Pluripotent stem cell: Having the ability to give rise to all of the various cell types of the
body. Pluripotent cells cannot make extra-embryonic tissues such as the amnion, 
42
chorion, and other components of the placenta. Scientists demonstrate pluripotency
by providing evidence of stable developmental potential, even after prolonged
culture, to form derivatives of all three embryonic germ layers from the progeny of a
single cell and to generate a teratoma after injection into an immunosuppressed
mouse.
Primitive streak: a collection of cells, which appears at about 14 days after fertilization from
which the foetal body plan develops
Regenerative medicine: A field of medicine devoted to treatments in which stem cells are
induced to differentiate into the specific cell type required to repair damaged or
destroyed cell populations or tissues
Somatic cell: cell of the body other than gamete
Somatic stem cell: an undifferentiated cell found among differentiated cells in a tissue or
organ, which can renew itself and can differentiate to yield the major specialized cell
types of the tissue or organ.
Somatic cell nuclear transfer: see cloning
‘Spare’ embryo: An embryo created during the course of IVF treatment of the infertile
couple which is not utilized for the purpose also known as supernumerary embryo.
Stem cells: Stem cells are undifferentiated cells with a capacity for self-renewal,
proliferation and differentiation into many different types of functional cell
Stem cell Bank: A facility that is responsible for accessioning, processing, packaging,
labelling, storage and delivery of appropriately defined different kinds of stem cells.
Teratoma: A tumour derived from more than one embryonic layer and made up of a
heterogeneous mixture of tissues (as epithelium, bone, cartilage, or muscle.
Totipotent: Having the ability to give rise to all the cell types of the body plus all of the cell
types that make up the extra embryonic tissues such as the placenta.
43
Drafting Committee for National Guidelines for Stem Cell Research
Member
(Late) Dr. Shyam S. Agarwal, Former Director SGPGI, Luknow and ACTREC, Mumbai
Dr. Avinash N. Bhisey, Former Director CRI, Mumbai
Dr. Narinder K. Mehra, Dean Research, AIIMS, New Delhi
Dr. Polani B. Seshagiri, Professor, IISc, Bangalore
Dr. Gopal Pande, Scientist G, CCMB, Hyderabad
Maj. Gen. Velu Nair, AFMC, Pune
Dr. Vikram Mathew, Professor, CMC, Vellore
Dr. Anis Sen Majumdar, CSO, Stempeutics Research Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore
Dr. Chandra Viswanathan, Vice President, Reliance Life Sciences, Mumbai
Dr. Naveen Khattri, ACTREC, Navi Mumbai
Dr. Manisha Madkaikar, Scientist ‘E’, NIIH, Mumbai
Mr. Umesh Baikunje, Vice President, Stempeutics Research Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore
Dr. Vasantha Muthuswamy, Former Sr. DDG, ICMR, Coimbatore
Dr. Nandini K. Kumar, Former DDG (Sr. Grade), ICMR
ICMR Secretariat
Dr. Vijay Kumar, Scientist ‘G’ & Head, Division of BMS
Dr. Geeta Jotwani, Scientist ‘E’
DBT Representative
Dr. Alka Sharma, Scientist ‘F’
44
45
National Apex Committee for Stem Cell Research and Therapy (NAC-SCRT)
Dr. Alok Srivastava, Haematologist, CMC, Vellore Chairman
Dr. Avinash Bhisey, Cancer Biologist, Ex Director CRI (TMH), Mumbai Alternative Chairman
Dr. Narinder Mehra, Immuno-Geneticist, AIIMS, New Delhi Member
Dr. Jyotsna Dhawan, Dean, SCSRM, Bangalore Member
Dr. Mitradas Panicker, Neurobiologist, NCBS, Bangalore Member
Dr. Rajeev Dhawan, Legal Expert, Supreme Court of India, New Delhi Member
Dr. Shashi Wadhwa, Developmental Biologist, AIIMS, New Delhi Member
Dr. Kamini Rao, Gynaecologist/ART Expert, Bangalore Member
Dr. Amita Singh, Social Scientist, JNU, New Delhi Member
Dr. Alka Sharma, Scientist ‘F’, DBT, New Delhi DBT- Nominee
Dr. Geeta Jotwani, Scientist ‘E’, ICMR, New Delhi ICMR - Nominee
Dr. Vijay Kumar, Scientist ‘G’, ICMR, New Delhi Member Secretary
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dr. K. N. Chaturvedi, Former Secretary, Min. of Law, New Delhi Special Invitee
Maj. Gen. Velu Nair, AFMC, Pune Special Invitee
Indian Council of Medical Research
V. Ramalingaswami Bhawan.
Ansari Nagar, New Delhi – 110029
Email: headquarters@icmr.org.in
Website: http://www.icmr.nic.in
