174
Trends Biomater. Artif. Organs, Vol 18 (2), January 2005 http://www.sbaoi.org
Introduction :
The field medical research and health care is
rapidly expanding. Most medical research is
not complete, unless experimentation on
human subjects, including children is
undertaken. Experimentation on human being
is subject to ethical standards that promote
respect for all and protect their health and
rights. With the rapidly progressing world of
biomedical research, there are newer
challenges to ethical standards; as a result the
ethical guidelines are frequently revised.
It is widely expected that any new therapeutic,
diagnostic or preventive product, that is likely
to be used in humans, should undergo adequate
safety and efficacy investigations.
In order that every research on human subject
is planned with a view to cause maximum
benefit to the mankind while causing least
damage to the research subject, it is essential
that an appropriately constituted ethics
committee approve all the research proposals.
Research requiring ethical review:
Research involving living human subjects and
use of their medical records.
Research involving human remains, cadavers,
biological fluids, tissues, embryos, fetuses etc.
National and International Ethical
Instruments and guidelines:
The Neuremberg Code formulated in 1947 was
the first international statement on the ethics
of medical research using human subjects. It
emphasized consent and voluntariness, The
Preliminary efforts by the council for
International organizations of Medical
Sciences (CIOMS) resulted into the Helsinki
Declaration formulated in the year 1964. This
Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research on Human Subjects
Nisha Shah
Senior Medical Officer
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, Hospital
Powai, Mumbai-400 076.
Abstract:
There have been considerable advances in medical sciences and biotechnology in the recent past. The
human biomedical research has continued to expand. In order to achieve smooth progress of research,
while preventing exploitation of human subjects, it is mandatory that every proposal on biomedical
research involving human subjects be cleared by an appropriately constituted institutional ethical
committee. The ethics committee is also responsible for regular monitoring of the compliance of the
ethical guidelines of the approved protocols, till the same are completed.
The Indian Council of Medical Research has laid down special guidelines for clinical trials of drugs and
medical devices. There is a proposal for establishment of Indian Medical Devices Regulatory Authority,
which will regulate the quality control and marketing of medical devices in India. Once established, the
system will encourage national and international marketing of medical devices.
Keywords : Indian council of medical research, Ethical guidelines
175
Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research on Human Subjects
is considered the fundamental document in the
field of Ethics, and is revised from time to time.
In1982, the world Health Organization (WHO)
and the CIOMS proposed ‘International
Guidelines for Biomedical Research involving
Human Subjects.’ Later ‘International Ethical
Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving
Human Subjects’ was brought by CIOMS in
the year 1993 and was revised in the year 2002
(2). Over the years many countries developed
their National Guidelines. The Indian council
of medical research, in the year 1980, released
a Policy Statement on ‘Ethical Considerations
Involved in Research on Human Subjects’ to
be followed in India for clinical research (1).
General Ethical Principles:
The general ethical principles are relevant to
all areas of biomedical research and are meant
to benefit all members of human species as
well as protect the ecological and
environmental well being. The general
principles issued by ICMR include principles
of informed consent, non-exploitation,
essentiality, privacy and confidentiality,
precaution and risk minimization, professional
competence, accountability and transparency,
distributive justice, institutional arrangements,
public domain, and compliance.
Statements of specific principles:
ICMR has laid down specific principles in the
following areas
1. Drug trials
2. Vaccine trials
3. Trials on surgical procedures and medical
devices
4. Trials on diagnostic agents with special
reference to radioactive materials and Xrays
5. Trials with herbal medicines
Drug trials:
Trial of any drug should be carried out, only
after approval of drugs controller general of
India (DGCI), as is necessary under The
Schedule –Y of Drugs and Cosmetic Act,
1940. The investigator should also get the
approval of ethical committee of the institution
before submitting the proposal to DCGI.
Phases of Clinical Trials:
1. Phase 1: During this phase, the safety of
the maximum tolerated dose in healthy
subjects of both sexes is determined. At
least 2 subjects should be administered a
specific dose to establish a safe dose range
and for detailed pharmacological studies.
The duration between two trials in the same
volunteer should be minimum of 3 months.
2. Phase 2: These are controlled studies
conducted in about 20-25 subjects, for each
dosage in subjects of both sexes; to
determine therapeutic uses, effective dose
range, safety and Pharmacokinetics. The
studies are limited to 3-4 centers.
3. Phase 3: These are multicentric trials on
large number of patients of both sexes
usually in comparison with a standard drug
and / or a placebo if a standard drug does
not exists for the disease under
consideration. Permission for marketing of
the drug is granted on successful
completion of this phase.
Many investigators at different centers
following the same protocol and proformae
conduct a multicentric trial simultaneously.
Ideally these trials are initiated at the same
time at all the centers.
4. Phase 4: These are post-marketing studies
undertaken to obtain additional information
about the drugs risks benefits and optimal
176
Nisha Shah
use. Any untoward reaction, observed to
the drug should be brought to the notice of
The Ethics Committee.
Trials of medical devices:
In last few years several medical devices have
been developed. There is a well-developed
system of evaluation and certification of
medical devices in most developed countries.
Unfortunately, India lacks any such system
presently. A proposal has been drafted for
setting up of a regulatory authority ‘Indian
Medical Devices Regulatory Authority’
(IMDRA). Until the guidelines are formulated
and regulated by this regulatory authority,
committees constituted for the specific purpose
should approve clinical trials with biomedical
devices on case-to-case basis.
Depending upon the risk involved to the
subjects, the devices can be classified as
critical or Non-critical. All the general
principles of clinical trials described for drug
trials should also be considered for trials of
medical devices. However, some important
factors are unique to evaluation of medical
devices. They are:
1. Phase 1 of drug trial is not necessary.
2. Detailed data of use of medical device in
animals should be obtained and likely risks
posed by the device should be considered.
3. Safety procedures to introduce the device
should also be followed as the procedure
itself can cause harm to the patients.
4. The patient information sheet of informed
consent should contain information on the
procedures to be adopted if the patient
decides to withdraw from the trial.
5. Critical and non-critical devices may have
different standards of approval.
Details of trials on diagnostic agents, vaccines,
and herbal remedies are not considered in this
article.
Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC):
Most Ethics Committees are formed at the
institutional level. The institutional ethics
committees have power to approve a proposal,
reject it or suggest modifications.
Ethics committee membership:
1. Chair person, preferably from outside the
institution
2. 1-2 basic medical scientists
3. 1-2 clinicians from various institutes
4. One legal expert or retired judge
5. One social scientist
6. One philosopher or ethicist
7. One lay person from community
8. Member secretary
Responsibility of IEC:
To determine;
Safety of proposed intervention in humans
Scientific soundness of proposed research
Ethical correctness of the research
Compensation and treatment of the subjects
Adequacy of qualification of investigators
Good working conditions at the research
site
To determine the informed consent
requirement
To maintain records of decisions
Ethical Review Procedures:
It is mandatory that all proposals on
biomedical research involving human subjects
177
should be presented before, and approved by,
appropriately constituted Ethics Committee.
Most ethics committees are constituted at the
institutional level.
Informed Consent Process:
The investigator must obtain the informed
consent of the prospective subject. If an
individual is not capable of giving informed
consent, the consent of legal guardian must
be obtained. In case of children, the consent
should be obtained from child’s parent or legal
guardian. Some children, who have not
reached the legally established age of consent,
but are able to understand the nature of
investigation, can give their agreement to serve
as research subjects. This agreement is known
as ‘Assent’. In older children, the consent
should be supplemented by assent.
The essential information to be provided to
the prospective research subjects are detailed
by ICMR in its document on Ethical
Guidelines for Biomedical research on Human
Subjects.
Waiver of Informed Consent:
It is considered when
1. The research design involves not more than
minimal risk to the subjects, the IEC may
waive off, some of the elements of the
informed consent.
2. During conditions of emergency informed
consent requirement can be waived off, if
the ethical committee has already approved
the study for trial.
Marketing of Medical Device:
After conceptualization of the medical device,
following steps are involved before it can be
marketed.
1. Animal and biocompatibility studies
2. Approval by controlling authority for
clinical trials
3. Clearance from IEC
4. Two stage premarketing evaluation /
Clinical trials
5. Certification by specially constituted
certifying authority
6. Permission for marketing
7. Continuous post marketing evaluation
References:
1. Ethical guidelines for biomedical research on human subjects. Indian Council of Medical
Research. New Delhi. 2000
2. International ethical guidelines for biomedical research involving human subjects. Council for
International Organizations of Medical Sciences. Geneva. 2002
Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research on Human Subjects