United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
Organisation des Nations Unies pour l’éducation, la science et la culture
International Bioethics
Committee (IBC)
Comité international
de bioéthique (CIB)
Distribution: limited
BIO-7/00/GT-1/2 (Rev. 3)
Paris, 6 April 2001
Original: English
The Use of
Embryonic Stem Cells
In Therapeutic Research ______________
REPORT OF THE IBC ON THE
ETHICAL ASPECTS OF HUMAN EMBRYONIC STEM CELL RESEARCH
Rapporteurs:
Alexander McCall Smith and Michel Revel
This Report was discussed at the Seventh Session of the International
Bioethics Committee (Quito, Ecuador, 7-9 November 2000) and
finalized after the meeting of the Extended Working Group on the
Ethical Aspects of Embryonic Stem Cell Research (UNESCO
Headquarters, 29 January and 2 February 2001).
Division of Human Sciences, Philosophy
and the Ethics of Sciences and Technology
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. THE ISSUE
II. THE SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND
III. POSSIBLE APPLICATIONS OF EMBRYONIC STEM CELL RESEARCH
IV. SOME EXISTING PROVISIONS
V. PHILOSOPHICAL AND RELIGIOUS VIEWS
VI. ETHICAL ARGUMENTS: THE STATUS OF THE HUMAN EMBRYO
VII. THE DIRECTION OF THE DEBATE
VIII. THE USE OF HUMAN EMBRYOS FOR EMBRYONIC STEM CELL RESEARCH:
OPTIONS
IX. EMBRYOS CREATED FOR RESEARCH
X. ETHICAL RESTRAINTS
XI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Bibliography and Sources
Annex Composition of the Working Group of the IBC on the ethical aspects of
embryonic stem cell research. 
I. The Issue
1. There is at present a considerable body of researchers who wish to engage in
research on a type of human cell known as the stem cell. This research, they argue,
will bring great benefits in that it might lead to the development of transplantable
tissues as therapies for a wide range of human illnesses, which are currently
considered difficult or impossible to treat. However, the stem cells in which they are
particularly interested are derived from the human embryo, and this gives rise to the
question: is it ethically acceptable to derive cells from a human embryo prior to its
implantation in utero in order to cultivate and investigate these cells in the laboratory
for therapeutic research? This is the issue which a Working Group of the International
Bioethics Committee of UNESCO (IBC) considered at a meeting at UNESCO
Headquarters in Paris in April 2000. Later the same year, the IBC debated the matter
at its Seventh Session (Quito, Ecuador, 7-9 November 2000). At this Session, the
exchange of views underlined the diversity of opinion which surrounds this question.
It was decided that any report which the IBC might adopt on this matter should reflect
this pluralism. This report, therefore, recognises that there are very marked differences
of opinion relating to embryo research. It aims to highlight the various ethical
arguments with a view to facilitating the resolution, at national and international level,
of a controversial matter. It recognises that the solutions adopted by national ethical
committees or national legislatures may well be different. Such differences are
inevitable in a pluralistic world where people may sometimes adopt ethical positions
which are unacceptable to others.
II. The Scientific Background
2. Stem cells are cells which have the ability to develop into more than one form
of human tissue. They may be totipotent (such as the early embryo cells, able to
develop into all the different types of cells needed for a complete and functioning
organism), pluripotent (such as embryonic stem cell lines, able to give rise to most
types of tissue but not capable of bringing a functioning organism into existence) or
multipotent (being able to give rise to a limited number of tissue types). These latter
stem cells are still present in the adult human body, but their potential to develop is
less than those of pluripotent embryonic stem cells, which form the focus of the
discussion in this report. Examples of adult stem cells are certain bone marrow cells
that give rise to all blood lineages but can turn also into liver cells or cardiac muscle
cells. Neural stem cells give rise to neurones and glial cells but can turn also into
heart, lung or liver cells. However, for preparation of tissues for transplantation, adult
stem cells do not offer of such wide potential to researchers as embryonic stem cells
and the ethical issues they may raise are not the same. This report shall therefore
concentrate on embryonic stem cells.
3. Embryonic stem cells may be derived from the embryo at the preimplantation
stage of its development. The extraction procedure will end the ability of that
particular embryo to develop through implantation in the uterus. The removal of the
cells, then, brings the existence of the embryo to an end. The embryo-derived cells are
not in themselves an embryo - they cannot develop into a human being; they are
therefore just like any other human tissue. 
- 2 -
4. The embryonic stem cells can be kept alive in an artificial medium and will
proliferate more or less indefinitely. It is suggested that in the future it will be possible
to facilitate the development of these cells into specific tissue types, thus affording the
possibility of growing “spare cells or tissue” which can then be injected or
transplanted into recipients. It is possible that, at some future stage, this tissue will be
used to construct part of or even entire organs for grafting into human hosts whose
organs are destroyed or impaired. Such products will have been derived in the first
place from embryos, hence the ethical question: is it acceptable to use embryonic stem
cell research for therapeutic purposes?
III. Possible Applications of Embryonic Stem Cell Research
5. Many scientists take the view that the benefits which might flow to humanity
from this form of research are so great that it is important that it be allowed to
proceed.
6. As far as transplant rejection is concerned, this risk could be avoided by
preparing the stem cells from “embryos” created by nuclear transfer (transfer of a
nucleus from the patient’s own cells). In this process, sometimes called “therapeutic
cloning”, there is a reprogramming of the donor cell nucleus in the recipient egg,
yielding again totipotent embryo cells. The tissues derived from such stem cells would
then be autologous to the recipient and not subject to immune rejection.
7. The benefits from embryonic stem cell technologies may also entail some risks,
which will have to be carefully weighed. One risk may be uncontrolled proliferation
of the transplanted cells and another may be transmission of infectious agents, but the
latter risk would be smaller with embryo stem cells than with adult stem cells.
8. Embryo stem cell research could indeed lead to substantial progress in the
treatment of various conditions, a few of which are indicated below only for purposes
of example.
Nervous System Diseases
9. Many of the conditions which afflict the human nervous system cannot
currently be treated or, if treatment is available, can only be treated with difficulty and
with disappointing results. The use of embryonic stem cells may significantly change
our ability to combat diseases such as Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s, Multiple Sclerosis
and other neurodegenerative diseases. Laboratory grown tissues derived from
embryonic stem cell lines could be used to replace the nervous tissue cells which are
lost or damaged in such diseases. It would be possible to transplant neurones that
insert themselves in the brain or spinal cord or produce various neurotransmitters that
are missing. It would also be possible to transplant glial cells that produce the myelin
coating around the nerves. Preliminary work of this nature in animal models has
yielded encouraging results. In the clinic, treatment of Parkinson’s patients by
transplantation of foetal brain cells has been practised on a limited scale but the
embryonic stem cell technology could allow many more patients to benefit from
neurone transplantation. 
- 3 -
Heart Infarction
10. The heart muscle cells that are destroyed when infarction prevents the blood
flowing through coronary arteries could be replaced by “patches” of cardiac smooth
muscle cells produced by in vitro differentiation of embryonic stem cell lines.
Bone and Cartilage Diseases
11. Conditions such as osteoarthritis, which involve damage to cartilage, might be
corrected by the insertion of cells, which repair the damaged section. Missing bone,
resulting from trauma or surgery, might be replaced by newly-generated bone cells.
Cancer and Immune Diseases
12. Blood and immune cell transplantations are part of cancer treatment allowing
more intensive use of cytotoxic anticancer drugs. Bone marrow or cord blood
employed today for such transplantations could be more efficiently replaced by
injections of hematopoietic stem cells derived from embryonic stem cells with defined
immunogenetic potential or autologous to the patients. Repair to the immune system
by this method would also be highly beneficial in the treatment of
immunodeficiencies such as AIDS, or auto-immune diseases such as Lupus or
Multiple Sclerosis.
Diabetes
13. The implantation of insulin-producing cells from pancreatic islets has already
met with limited success. Xenotransplantation provides some prospects here, but there
are major issues of public safety which restrict this option. The cultivation of beta islet
cells, derived from embryonic stem cells, could provide a useful solution to the
current shortage of transplantable tissue and rejection problems.
IV. Some Existing Provisions
14. At the international level, there are few regulatory provisions concerning
research on human embryos. Many texts proclaim the right to life in general, e.g. the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948 (Art. 3), the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights of 1966 (Art. 1) or the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights of 1981 (Art. 4). Others more specifically proclaim the right to life of
the conceived child, e.g. the American Convention on Human Rights of 1969, which
stipulates that “every person has the right to have his life respected. This right shall be
protected by law and, in general, from the moment of conception” (Art. 4)(1).
15. At the European level, the Council of Europe’s Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with regard to the Application of
Biology and Medicine of 1997 does not resolve the matter of the permissibility of
embryo research and leaves each country responsibility for legislating on this matter,
while stipulating two conditions: the prohibition of producing human embryos for

1. Twenty-six countries have ratified the American Convention: Argentina, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica (Commonwealth), Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Trinidad and
Tobago, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela. 
- 4 -
research purposes and the adoption of rules designed to assure adequate protection for
the embryo(2). An Additional Protocol to the Convention on the Prohibition of Cloning
Human Beings was approved in 1998 and took effect on 3 January 2001 in five
Member States(3).
16. The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, adopted in Nice,
France, in December 2000, expressly prohibits eugenic practices and reproductive
cloning, but does not comment explicitly on embryo research. In a Resolution of 7
September 2000, the European Parliament stated its opposition to the creation of
supernumerary embryos and to therapeutic cloning. More recently, the European
Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to the European Commission
(EGE) adopted Opinion No. 15 of 14 November 2000 on the ethical aspects of human
stem cell research and use, in which it states that “stem cell research based on
alternative sources (spare embryos, foetal tissues and adult stem cells) requires a
specific Community budget”, while pointing out that “it is up to each Member State to
forbid or authorise embryo research”. On the other hand, the Group considers
“ethically unacceptable” the creation of embryos with donated gametes for the purpose
of deriving stem cells, and “premature” the creation of embryos by somatic nuclear
transfer.
17. At the national level, research on human embryos is permitted in some
countries (with varying degrees of supervision), while it is expressly prohibited in
others. The second category includes Ireland, where Article 40, par. 3, of the
Constitution implicitly prohibits research on the embryo by stating the right to life of
the “unborn child” equal to that of the mother. In Germany, the Law of 13 December
1990 on Embryo Protection regards as an offence the fertilization of an ovum for
purposes other than its reimplantation in the donor; it takes the same position on the
fertilization of a larger number of ova than can be implanted. The situation is similar in
Austria, where Law No. 275 of 1992 authorises the creation of embryos only for
reproductive purposes. In Hungary (Law No. LXXIX of 1992) and Poland (Law of 7
January 1993 as amended on 30 August 1996), the life of the unborn child must be
respected and protected from its conception. In Norway, the Law N.°56 of 5 August
1994 prohibits research on embryos and bans their use for any purpose other than
reimplantation in the donor. In Tunisia, the National Medical Ethics Committee has
stated its opposition to all experimentation on the embryo which is regarded as a
“potential person” (Opinion No.1 of 12 December 1996) and also to any form of
cloning (Opinion No. 3 of 22 May 1997). In Switzerland, the Constitution (1999)
prohibits the use of medically assisted reproduction for research purposes and the
fertilization of more ova than are capable of being immediately implanted (Art. 119, 2c).
In Italy, the bill on medically assisted reproduction specifically prohibits the creation of
embryos for research purposes and the early splitting of the embryo for therapeutic or
research purposes. The Italian National Committee on Bioethics has opposed
reproductive cloning, but was unable to reach a consensus on matters relating to the use
of supernumerary embryos and on therapeutic cloning (Opinion of 27 October 2000).

2. Six countries have ratified the European Convention: Denmark, Greece, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia
and Spain.
3. Georgia, Greece, Slovakia, Slovenia and Spain. 
- 5 -
18. As far as Latin America is concerned, in Brazil Law No. 8974/95 on genetic
engineering prohibits the production, storage and manipulation of human embryos
with a view to their use as biological material. Peru specifically prohibits the
fertilization of human ova for purposes other than reproduction, and human cloning
(Law No. 26.842). The right to life from the moment of conception is recognised in
Peru by the Children and Adolescent Code (Law No. 27.337), in Costa Rica by Law
No. 7739 of 1998 and in Ecuador by Article 49, par. 1, of the Constitution (1998).
19. In a number of other countries, the use for research purposes of embryos
donated by persons following a treatment against sterility and not intended for
implantation (supernumerary embryos) is permitted. In general, the conditions
imposed are the prohibition of research after the 14th day of existence of the embryo
and the consent of the couple who supplies the embryo. That is the case, for example,
in Canada, Sweden (Law No. 115) and Finland (Law No. 488/1999). In Spain (Law
No. 35/1988), research on supernumerary embryos is permitted under rigorous
restrictions, but their creation for this specific purpose is prohibited. In September
2000, the Observatory of Law and Bioethics of Barcelona did, however, express its
support for the creation of embryos for research purposes, both by donation and by
cloning techniques. In Australia, the law varies between different States and
Territories and, in some, the subject is not regulated by law. For such cases, the
Australian National Health and Medical Council has formulated guidelines (The
Ethical Guidelines on Assisted Reproductive Technology, par. 6) which, although not
legally binding, are influential.
20. Finally, other countries are envisaging authorization of the creation of embryos
for research purposes. In the United Kingdom, since 1990 the Human Fertilisation and
Embryology Act authorises the use of supernumerary embryos for restricted research
purposes - in particular concerning reproductive medicine and for the diagnosis of
genetic and chromosomal disorders - and the production of embryos for these
purposes. On 22 January 2001, the House of Lords passed a law (already approved in
December 2000 by the House of Commons), which permits the cloning of human
embryos to derive stem cells, thus allowing the possibility of therapeutic cloning. In
France, Law No. 94-654 of 1994, which prohibits embryo research, is currently under
review. In accordance with the opinions delivered by the National Ethics Consultative
Committee(4) and the Conseil d’Etat(5), the draft bill permits the production for research
purposes of stem cell lines from supernumerary embryos and therapeutic cloning. In
November 2000, Japan adopted a law prohibiting reproductive cloning and prescribing
the adoption of directives, which should permit the use of stem cells derived from
supernumerary embryos and therapeutic cloning. In the Netherlands, a bill is currently
being prepared, which prohibits the production of embryos for research purposes, with
many exceptions. However, the bill authorises research into stem cells obtained from
supernumerary embryos. In Belgium, similar bills are being debated in the Senate.
21. In the United States of America, although the Federal financing of such
activities is prohibited, the authorization of research on the embryo is left to the
discretion of each State. To this date, nine States prohibit such research. However, in a

4. CCNE Opinion No. 53 of 11 March 1997.
5. Report to the Council of State, November 1999 «Les lois de bioéthique: cinq ans après » (The laws on
bioethics: five years on). 
- 6 -
number of States, there is effectively no control over private research of this sort. In
1999, the National Bioethics Advisory Commission recommended that Federal
regulations should permit research into embryonic stem cells obtained from
supernumerary embryos. However, it remains opposed to therapeutic cloning and to
the deliberate production of embryos for the purpose of obtaining stem cells. In August
2000, the National Institutes of Health issued guidelines on the circumstances in which
Federally supported scientists might engage in such research. One of the conditions to
be met is that no such scientist might destroy an embryo to derive cells: this will have
to be done by privately-funded scientists, who will then pass the cells on to their
publicly-funded colleagues.
V. Philosophical and Religious Views
22. The debates about bioethics occur in a context of philosophical and religious
reflection about the nature of human life, from its commencement to its conclusion, and
the respect due to human life as such. Modern international human rights principles,
beginning with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948, attach fundamental
significance to the human being and respect for his or her dignity as such. Such
principles themselves reflect longstanding debates amongst philosophers and scholars of
every cultural tradition in the world.
23. Amongst modern philosophers, there is an active debate about the
philosophical foundation for research into, and use of, embryonic cells precisely
because of the potential of the human embryo to develop into a human being with the
unique and special qualities inherent in that status. Such debates are not confined to a
religious and spiritual context. Philosophers of no religious opinion, and humanists
approaching the issues in a wholly secular way, have expressed the need for the
development of principles to guide the ethical permissibility of embryonic stem cell
research and use.
24. The opinions expressed by some major religions have indeed contributed
greatly to these debates. Because bioethics concerns itself with fundamental issues of
human life, these opinions play an important role in the issue. This has been very
much apparent in the discussion of embryo research in general, where it is clear that
there are fundamental disagreements as to the extent to which embryo research is
compatible with religious beliefs as to the sanctity of human life.
25. On the basis of religious beliefs, there is a broad range of positions on the
status of the embryo and on the permissibility of using the embryo for any form of
research (including stem cell therapeutic research). Pending an ideal systematic
consultation of each and every culture and religion on this issue, suffice it to indicate
that some of these consider permissible the use of embryos for therapeutic purposes,
or for the purposes of research, while others do not accept the use of embryos for such
purposes.
26. The theological basis of these positions itself varies, and it must also be borne
in mind that these religious traditions also have a range of views within them. In
general, though, it is possible to identify a position which represents an area of broad
agreement within that tradition. 
- 7 -
27. For example, in the case of Islam, the use of embryos for therapeutic or
research purposes may be acceptable provided that it takes place before the point at
which the embryo is ensouled, i.e from the 40th day after fertilization.
28. Some branches of Christian thought (in the Protestant tradition) regard full
human status as something which is acquired gradually, and which might therefore not
be present in the early embryo. Protestant theology, however, is very diverse, and it is
more difficult to find a single source of authority on this issue to which reference
might be made. It is, in fact, part of the Protestant ethos that moral questions are
determined by the individual conscience, and there is therefore room for a variety of
stances on this point. Protestant thought, therefore, may accept that this is an issue on
which Christians may have very differing views, with these differing views being
compatible with Christian beliefs.
29. In Judaism, the Biblical and Talmudic law holds that the full status of a human
being is not present at the moment of fertilization, but is acquired after a period of
post-implantation development. An important feature of Jewish thinking in this area is
that embryos outside the womb, in analogy to gametes, have no legal status unless
parental intent gives them life potential by implantation and pregnancy. An embryo
made for IVF treatment and maintained in vitro without potential for implantation
could therefore be donated and used for therapeutic research. This would be in line
with the life-saving duty, which is a strong one in Judaism.
30. The most strongly argued opposition to the use of embryos for therapeutic or
research purposes is to be found within the Roman Catholic tradition. In the Catholic
view, a human being comes into existence at the time of fertilization, and the embryo
is therefore considered as a human individual having the right to its own life(6). An
individual embryo should therefore be given the opportunity to develop into a mature
human being. It is an implication of this position that it is necessary to strictly control
the fertilization of ova in vitro, and it is impermissible to use supernumerary embryos
for therapeutic purposes. This is because the life of that embryo is sacred and it cannot
be ended by any human agency.
31. This brief statement of some of the major religious positions on the use of
embryos reveals a stark contrast between religious notions of the status of the embryo.
If the question is defined as the embryo moral status, the various religious traditions
are prone to take opposite positions. If it is defined in a broader perspective, then there
may be room for some agreement.
VI. Ethical Arguments: The Status of the Human Embryo
32. The ethical legitimacy of performing human embryonic stem cell research
depends, in large measure, on the status which is attributed to the embryo. Although
there are other considerations having a bearing on the ethical question - such as the
consent of the “owners” or creators of the embryo (the parents) -, the categorising of
the embryo is crucial to the question of what can be done with it. Much of the ethical
debate in this area has been taken up with the question of just what the embryo is. If

6. The IBC was provided by the Holy See with a note dated 2 August 2000 on embryonic stem cells and
the status of the embryo. 
- 8 -
the embryo is a human being (or person), then our treatment of it is limited to that
which we are allowed to do to other human beings. If, by contrast, it is no more than a
collection of human cells, then there are far fewer restraints on our handling of it.
Mid-way views on the embryo allow for varying degrees of restraint on its use.
33. It is clear that the human embryo has a unique status in biological terms. Unlike
any other cluster of living cells, it has the capacity to develop into a functioning
complex organism that will be substantially differentiated from the entity it once was.
This difference may be described as the embryo’s potential - the potential to become a
fully-developed human being. That is, of course, only a biological fact, but it is a
biological fact in the face of which we stand in moral awe. In so far as our ethical
notions depend upon the valuing of human life, then the human embryo demands
respect as the source of the human life to which we attach such significance. But how
far should this respect go? Much in nature is respected, but is still used by humankind
for its benefit. The real issue is whether the embryo can be brought within full
membership of the moral community to which we exclusively admit human persons
and human persons alone. If the embryo can be admitted to this community, then it
becomes ethically impermissible to use it as a means to an end, and not as an end in
itself. More problematic is potential for membership of this community. In one view,
the fact that the embryo has the potential to become a human being gives it a
particular status, which should protect it from destruction.
34. Arguments about whether the human embryo can be considered a person have
been prolonged and marked by a failure to reach agreement. In one view, personhood
begins with the fertilisation of the ovum by the sperm; from that moment on, the
admittedly primitive organism has an identity which will link it continuously to the
infant, to the child, and later to the adult human being it will become. To end the life
of the embryo, then, amounts to an ending of the future life of the infant and, indeed,
of the child and the adult. Personhood in this view is an ethically significant quality,
which human beings have at every stage of their lives, beginning with the embryo and
surviving until death brings it to an end.
35. This view of personhood has been challenged by those moral philosophers who
see personhood as being dependent on an ability to experience those features of life
which lend to life its value and meaning. From the biological point of view, personal
individuality can be attributed to the embryo only after the day in its early
development when division into normal twins is not possible any more (up to 13 days
after-fertilization). Embryos are therefore entitled to respect, but would not enjoy the
personhood.
36. A major subject of debate is that of the potentiality of the embryo. The human
embryo has the potential to become a person even if it is not yet a person. For this
reason, the defenders of a protected embryo status argue that it is wrong to do to the
embryo anything that will prevent it from fulfilling this potential. Opponents of this
view argue in turn that the potential to become a thing does not give one that status
which goes with having become that thing. Ova and sperm are components of the
zygote, which later becomes an embryo and then a fetus, but that does not mean that
they can enjoy the status appropriate to a zygote or a fetus until that stage of
development has been reached. We do not accord fetal status to sperm; why, then,
accord human being status to an embryo? Moreover, an embryo resulting from in vitro
- 9 -
fertilization, but which will not be implanted in a uterus, has no potential to develop
into a human being. The same applies to “embryos” made by nuclear transfer, which
should not be implanted for the purposes of human reproductive cloning.
VII. The Direction of the Debate
37. Any perusal of the debate which has been ongoing over the past few decades
about the status of the embryo will reveal that this is an area in which strong
convictions have been pitted against one another, and that consensus has usually
eluded those who enter the debate from opposing starting points. In these
circumstances, one might ask whether it is possible for a body such as the IBC to
pronounce on the subject, or whether one might simply conclude that the use of
embryos for research purposes is a matter of private conviction. From such a
perspective, it might be argued that at a national level, each society should determine
what appears to be an acceptable national position and regulate the matter
accordingly. This might involve the choosing of that position - facilitative or
otherwise - which reflects the majority view, or it might involve a compromise
between prohibition and permission, perhaps allowing for embryo research in
exceptional circumstances and under very strict control. An alternative is to have no
laws on the subject at all and indeed no official ethical position. This would mean that
embryo research is left a matter of individual conscience, with the organs of society
taking no position on the matter. This last option does not appear at present to attract a
great deal of support: there is a widespread view that this area of research needs at
least some degree of regulation, and this view is reflected in the increasing tendency
for national legislative and governmental bodies and national ethics committees to
take a position on human embryo research. In these circumstances, it is appropriate for
the International Bioethics Committee to clarify the different positions and indicate
their ethical implications.
VIII. The Use of Human Embryos for Embryonic Stem Cell Research: Options
38. In relation to the question of embryonic stem cell research, the IBC confined its
attention to the human embryo in its early stages of development and before
implantation in the uterus: it did not consider the status of the human fetus implanted
in the uterus and further along the line of development that will normally result in
birth. This is a separate question on which it was not necessary for the IBC to take a
view in this Report.
39. Three principal positions have emerged in the national and international debate
on the issue of embryonic stem cell research. These are: (a) the position which holds
that use of human embryos for deriving embryonic stem cells is intrinsically unethical,
(b) the position which holds that such use is ethically acceptable for certain medical
purposes and subject to rigorous safeguards; and (c) the position which considers that,
taking into account the present risks linked with this research and its possible ethical
drifts (inter alia, the risks of instrumentalization of the embryo), embryonic stem cell
research should not be allowed. The IBC recognises that all these positions are
ethically intelligible positions to adopt and deserve deeper discussion. 
- 10 -
40. If, at national level, there is no possibility of conducting research on embryos,
then embryonic stem cell research is a fortiori excluded. If it is considered that
embryo research is in principle ethically permissible, the following ethical
considerations will have to be taken into account.
41. Several sources of embryo may be identified, with different ethical
considerations applying in each case. The various cases are:
(1) the embryo which is created by in vitro fertilization (IVF) in order to be
implanted in the uterus and identified as suitable for this purpose;
(2) the embryo which has been created in vitro to be implanted as in (1), but
which is supernumerary (excess embryos having to be created to insure
successful pregnancy in infertility treatments);
(3) the embryo which is created by oocyte-sperm fertilisation for purposes
of research or for purposes of the development of stem cell lines; and
(4) the “embryo” which is created through the transfer of the nucleus of a
donor cell into the denucleated oocyte.
42. The IBC took account of the view that what gave the embryo a status in this
context was its individual potential to develop into a person. If this potential were not
present in a particular case, because there is no possibility of implantation (e.g., for
medical reasons or due to parental decision, excluding any commercial incentive),
then it is ethically defensible to use the embryo for medical and therapeutic research
needs because it has no potential to develop into a person. The only other option is its
destruction.
43. A further consideration is the benefit that flows from deriving stem cell lines
from “non-implantable” embryos for medical applications, i.e. use of such embryos
for the good of others. Although benefit to others will rarely, of itself, be sufficient to
justify a course of action which may be ethically doubtful, this altruistic therapeutic
intention can contribute moral legitimacy to the ethical choice of authorising the use
of human embryos.
44. If we apply these considerations to the cases listed above, we see that:
(a) an embryo in (1) has a special status as the likely precursor of a human
being and should not, in general, be treated in any way likely to prevent
the fulfilment of that potential (subject to the exception that some moral
traditions and some legal systems allow abortion, especially to protect
the mother’s right to life);
(b) embryos in (2) have no future. If IVF is allowed, as it is in many
countries, then it is ethically permissible to use these supernumerary
embryos for research and for therapeutic purposes, the only other option
being their destruction;
(c) embryos in (3) and (4) have been created specifically for research
purposes. Their use requires special consideration, as expanded below. 
- 11 -
IX. Embryos Created for Embryonic Stem Cell Research
45. The creation of human embryos specifically for research purposes is to be
distinguished from the research use of embryos which have been created with a view
to their implantation but which have not been able to be implanted and have therefore
become supernumerary. In the case of the specially-created embryo, the act of
creation is intended to fulfil a purpose, which is unrelated to any interest which the
created organism might have; in the case of the supernumerary embryo, the organism
has not initially been seen as a means to another end, but has been created as an end in
itself.
46. Is there any justification for allowing the creation of human embryos in order to
derive from them stem cells, which will be used for therapeutic purposes? If the
embryo is considered to have a status which goes with personhood, then this would
offend the principle prohibiting the instrumentalization of persons. If it is not
considered to have such a status, however, there may be no objection to its use for the
benefit of others and the potential gains should be weighed against any damage that
such a use would entail to any recognised value.
47. Assuming that the embryo is not to be given the status which goes with
personhood, it would be permissible to use the embryo for purposes which did not
demean it. It would clearly be unacceptable for human embryos to be used for
purposes which would reflect contempt for the class of embryos in general (given that
some human embryos, those that are either implanted or are to be implanted, are
accorded particular respect and protection). If we cherish human life, then we must
cherish all manifestations of the body; hence the universal habit of according
reverence to human remains and the widespread ethical prohibitions against the casual
abuse of the human body. To endorse any use of the human embryo which was not
consistent with a reverence for human life would be widely regarded as wrong. Those
who believe that therapeutic research on embryos is ethically permissible, might argue
that the creation and use of a human embryo outside the context of human
reproduction does not necessarily undermine the attitude of respect for the human
body and human dignity, provided that the purposes involved in such creation and use
are purposes which we would recognise as beneficial ones. Medical uses fall into this
category. In this view, it would appear to be quite consistent with an attitude of
respect for human life to allow the use of human embryos at an early stage of
development, well before the stage at which anything resembling a self can be said to
come into existence. Such use promises to provide the possibility of the relief of a
great deal of human suffering, a goal which in no sense calls into question respect for
the human body.
48. Nuclear transfer provides an alternative way of creating human “embryos” with
the purpose of deriving stem cells, although at present this technique is unproven. This
is a form of cloning, but it is not reproductive cloning, as the resulting “embryo” is not
created for implantation. Because of its purpose, it is sometimes called “therapeutic
cloning”. The attraction of this method of producing embryonic stem cells lies in the
fact that these cells would be compatible with the cells of the donor of the nucleus.
This presents major possibilities for autologous transplantation, in which the problem
of rejection is largely overcome. 
- 12 -
49. The IBC considered arguments that it may be ethically acceptable to create
“embryos” by nuclear transfer in order to produce embryonic stem cells for
therapeutic purposes. The implantation of an “embryo” created in this way would not
be permissible under the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human
Rights and is, indeed, prohibited in many national legislations. Those who argue that
nuclear transfer should be allowed point out that benefits of the procedure can take
precedence over the fears deriving from this “slippery slope” argument. This
procedure puts to the front the same ethical questions as those raised by research
involving supernumerary embryos.
50. The IBC also considered arguments of those who strongly oppose nuclear
transfer, seeing in it the first steps towards human reproductive cloning. They argue
that even if such embryos are not going to be allowed to develop beyond a very
limited stage, such steps will assist the development of techniques which could be
used one day in reproductive cloning.
X. Ethical Restraints
51. If research is allowed on human embryos with the purpose of deriving
embryonic stem cells, then it must be subjected to strict supervision and to severe
basic constraints. These include the obtaining of full consent on the part of the donors
of the biological material and the requirement that the research be justifiable in terms
of the benefit which it offers humanity. The IBC considers that research for nonmedical purposes would clearly be unethical, as would research which persisted
beyond the very early stages of embryonic development. As expanded upon in section
III, the medical applications of embryonic stem cell research must be well-identified
therapeutic applications and not trivial or cosmetic non-medical desires, nor a fortiori
for eugenic enhancement. Imperatives of social justice must be upheld, and the
altruistic nature of this research must be reasonably recognised in the process of
embryo donation as well as in the commercial applications of the new therapeutic
means. Under no circumstances should human embryo donation be a commercial
transaction, and steps should be taken to discourage financial incentives.
XI. Summary and Conclusions
52. As seen throughout this report, the underlying ethical concern in human
embryonic stem cell research is, for many, the status of human embryos and their use
for therapeutic purposes. This issue has complex ramifications and the various views
are obviously influenced by the concept of human life and personhood particular to
each culture, religion or philosophy. There is very serious disagreement on the ethical
questions raised by embryonic stem cell research. One view is that the use of human
embryos for deriving embryonic stem cells is intrinsically unethical: to use embryos in
this way is to instrumentalise human life and seriously to weaken the respect which is
accorded to a vulnerable category of persons, namely, human embryos. Another view
is that such use is ethically acceptable for certain medical purposes and subject to
rigorous safeguards: although the human embryo has a unique status because of its
individual potential to develop into a person, it does not entail the respect and
protection which goes with personhood. Finally, a mid-way view can be identified 
- 13 -
according to which, taking into account the present risks linked with this research and
its possible ethical drifts, embryonic stem cell research should not be allowed. The
conclusions of this Report need to reflect these differences of opinion.
53. Every society has the right and duty to debate and decide upon ethical issues
with which it is confronted. Where there is fundamental disagreement, the society will
have to decide where it stands on an issue either because the question involved relates
to some fundamental value of that society or because practical considerations demand
that the matter be resolved. The use of human embryos for deriving stem cells would
appear to be one such issue.
54. Human embryonic stem cell research – and embryo research in general – is a
matter which each community (and this will usually mean a State) will have to decide
itself. If the decision is reached after serious ethical debate, which allows for the
expression of views in different directions, then this must be accepted if one believes
in the principle of the democratic resolution of public issues. Examples of this process
are afforded by IVF for fertility treatment and by pre-implantation diagnosis with
embryo selection: there are differences of opinion on the ethical values involved and
yet many States have decided that these medical practices are permissible.
55. The International Bioethics Committee of UNESCO therefore by consensus
adopts the following conclusions:
A. The IBC recognises that human embryonic stem cell research is a subject on
which it is desirable for a debate to occur at national level to identify which
position on this issue is to be adopted, including abstaining from this research.
It urges that debates be conducted at appropriate national regulatory levels,
enabling expression of a range of views, and whenever possible allowing a
consensus to be reached on the limits of the permissible in this important new
therapeutic research field. There should be an on-going process of education
and information in this area. States should take appropriate measures to initiate
an on-going dialogue within society on the ethical issues raised by such
research, involving all actors concerned.
B. Whatever form of research involving embryos is allowed, steps should be taken
to ensure that such research be carried out within the framework of a Statesponsored regulatory system that would give due weight to ethical
considerations, and set up appropriate guidelines. When authorisation of
donations of supernumerary pre-implantation embryos from IVF treatments for
therapeutic embryonic stem cell research is under consideration, particular
attention should be given to the dignity and rights of both parental donors of
embryos. Thus, it is essential that the donation be made only after the donors
should have been given full information as to the implications of the research
and have given their prior, free and informed consent. The purposes for which
such research is carried out, and the way of its performance, should be subject
to assessment by the appropriate ethics committees, which should be
independent of the researchers involved. This assessment should include ex post
facto ethical evaluation of such research. 
- 14 -
C. Alternative new technologies for obtaining human stem cell lines, from
genetically compatible sources for transplantation therapeutic research, should
be considered. These new technologies include cells taken from an existing
adult individual, i.e. adult stem cells, or nuclear transfer. The advantages and
risks of these new technologies should be carefully weighed: in this respect, it
should be recalled that nuclear transfer should be used only for therapeutic
research.
D. Considering the importance and sensitivity of the subject, the IBC will keep this
issue under consideration taking into account the discussions and regulations at
national, regional and international levels.
E. In all aspects of research involving human embryos, particular importance
should be given to respect of human dignity and the principles set out in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) and the Universal Declaration
on the Human Genome and Human Rights (1997). 
BIBLIOGRAPHY AND SOURCES
NATIONAL LEGAL SOURCES
Constitutions:
- Ecuador, Constitution of 5 June 1998.
- Ireland, Constitution of 1st July 1937 (as amended on 7 October 1983).
- Switzerland, Constitution of 18 April 1999.
Legislation:
- Australia, Gene Technology Act 2000, expected to commence in June 2001.
- Austria, Law n° 275 of 1992 on reproductive medicine.
- Brazil, Law n° 8974/95 of 5 January 1995 on genetic engineering.
- Costa Rica, Law n° 7739 of 1998, Code of Childhood and Adolescence.
- Finland, Statute n° 488/1999 of 9 April 1999, Medical Research Act.
- France, Law n° 94-654 of 29 July 1994 on the donation and use of elements and products
of the human body, medically assisted procreation and prenatal diagnosis.
- Germany, Law of 13 December 1990, the Federal Embryo Protection Law.
- Hungary, Law n° LXXIX of 17 December 1992 on the protection of the life of the
embryo.
- Japan, Law of 30 November 2000 concerning regulation relating to the techniques of
human cloning and other similar techniques.
- Norway, Law n° 56 of 5 August 1994 on the medical use of biotechnology (amended by
Law n° 29 of 16 May 1997).
- Peru: - Law n° 26.842 General Law on Public Health.
- Law n° 27.337 Code of Childhood and Adolescence.
- Poland, Law of 7 January 1993 on family planning, protection of the human fetus and the
admissibility conditions for the artificial termination of pregnancy (as amended on 30
August 1996).
- Spain, Law n° 35 of 1988 on assisted reproduction procedures.
- Sweden, Law n° 115 of 14 March 1991 on measures relating to the use of human
fertilized ovocytes for research or therapeutic purposes.
- United Kingdom: - Law of 1 November 1990, Human Fertilization and
Embryology Act.
- Law of 23 January 2001, amending the Human Fertilization
and Embryology Act of 1 November 1990.
Bills:
- Belgium, Bills on the protection of embryos, Senate.
- France, Draft of the revised “Bioethics Law”, presented by the Prime Minister on 28
November 2000.
- Italy, Bill n° 4048 on the discipline of medically assisted procreation.
- Netherlands, Bill containing rules relating to the use of gametes and embryos (Embryos Bill). 
- 16 -
Opinions and Reports:
- Australia: - Australian Academy of Science, “On Human Cloning. A Position
Statement”, 4 February 1999.
- National Health and Medical Research Council, “Ethical Guidelines on
Assisted Reproductive Technology”.
- Canada, Tri-Council Policy Statement, “Ethical conduct for research involving humans”,
August 1998.
- France: - National Consultative Bioethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences,
Opinion n° 53 of 11 March 1997 on the establishment of collection of human
embryo cells and their use for therapeutic or scientific purposes.
- Conseil d’Etat, Report “The Bioethics Laws after five years”, November 1999.
- Italy, National Bioethics Committee, Opinion of 27 October 2000 on the therapeutic use
of stem cells.
- Pontificia Academia Pro Vita, Declaration on the Production and the Scientific and
Therapeutic Use of Human Embryonic Stem Cells, August 2000.
- Tunisia, National Medical Ethics Committee:
- Opinion n° 1 of 12 December 1996 on medically assisted reproduction.
- Opinion n° 3 of 22 Mai 1997 on cloning.
- United States of America: - National Bioethics Advisory Commission, “Ethical Issues
in Human Stem Cell Research”, September 1999.
- National Institutes of Health, “Guidelines for Research
Using Human Pluripotent Stem Cells”, 25 August 2000.
- American Association for the Advancement of Science - Institute for Civil Society,
“Stem Cell Research and Applications”, November 1999.
INTERNATIONAL LEGAL SOURCES
Universal Intergovernmental Organizations:
United Nations System:
- Universal Declaration on Human Rights, adopted and proclaimed by the United Nations
General Assembly on 10 December 1948.
- International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly on 16 December 1966.
- Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights, adopted by the General
Conference of UNESCO on 11 November 1997, and endorsed by the United Nations
General Assembly on 9 December 1998.
Regional Intergovernmental Organizations:
Council of Europe:
- Convention for the protection of human rights and dignity of the human being with regard
to the application of biology and medicine (Convention on Human Rights and
Biomedicine), 4 April 1997.
- Additional Protocol to the Convention for the protection of human rights and dignity of
the human being with regard to the application of biology and medicine, on the
Prohibition of Cloning Human Beings, 12 January 1998. 
- 17 -
European Union:
Conventions:
- Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, December 2000.
Resolutions:
- Resolution on Human Cloning of the European Parliament of 7 September 2000.
Opinions:
- The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to the European
Commission, Opinion n° 12 “Ethical Aspects of Research Involving the Use of Human
Embryos in the Context of the 5th Framework Programme” of 23 November 1998.
- The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to the European
Commission , Opinion n° 15 “Ethical Aspects Human Stem Cell Research and Use” of 14
November 2000.
Organization of African Unity:
- African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights of 27 June 1981.
Organization of American States:
- American Convention on Human Rights of 22 November 1969.
Articles
1. Annas, G.J., Caplan, A. and Elias, S. (1999) Stem cell politics, ethics and medical
progress. Nat Med, 5, 1339-41.
2. Baguisi, A., Behboodi, E., Melican, D.T., Pollock, J.S., Destrempes, M.M., Cammuso, C.,
Williams, J.L., Nims, S.D., Porter, C.A., Midura, P., Palacios, M.J., Ayres, S.L.,
Denniston, R.S., Hayes, M.L., Ziomek, C.A., Meade, H.M., Godke, R.A., Gavin, W.G.,
Overstrom, E.W. and Echelard, Y. (1999) Production of goats by somatic cell nuclear
transfer. Nat Biotechnol, 17, 456-61
3. Brustle, O., Jones, K.N., Learish, R.D., Karram, K., Choudhary, K., Wiestler, O.D.,
Duncan, I.D. and McKay, R.D. (1999) Embryonic stem cell-derived glial precursors: a
source of myelinating transplants. Science, 285, 754-6.
4. Brustle, O., Spiro, A.C., Karram, K., Choudhary, K., Okabe, S. and McKay, R.D. (1997)
In vitro-generated neural precursors participate in mammalian brain development. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A, 94, 14809-14.
5. Campbell, K.H., McWhir, J., Ritchie, W.A. and Wilmut, I. (1996) Sheep cloned by
nuclear transfer from a cultured cell line. Nature, 380, 64-6.
6. Cibelli, J.B., Stice, S.L., Golueke, P.J., Kane, J.J., Jerry, J., Blackwell, C., Ponce de Leon,
F.A. and Robl, J.M. (1998) Cloned transgenic calves produced from nonquiescent fetal
fibroblasts. Science, 280, 1256-8.
7. Cibelli, J.B., Stice, S.L., Golueke, P.J., Kane, J.J., Jerry, J., Blackwell, C., Ponce de Leon,
F.A. and Robl, J.M. (1998) Transgenic bovine chimeric offspring produced from somatic
cell-derived stem-like cells. Nat Biotechnol, 16, 642-6. 
- 18 -
8. Deacon, T., Dinsmore, J., Costantini, L.C., Ratliff, J. and Isacson, O. (1998) Blastulastage stem cells can differentiate into dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons after
transplantation. Exp Neurol, 149, 28-41.
9. Dominko, T., Mitalipova, M., Haley, B., Beyhan, Z., Memili, E., McKusick, B. and First,
N.L. (1999) Bovine oocyte cytoplasm supports development of embryos produced by
nuclear transfer of somatic cell nuclei from various mammalian species. Biol Reprod, 60,
1496-502.
10. Flax, J.D., Aurora, S., Yang, C., Simonin, C., Wills, A.M., Billinghurst, L.L., Jendoubi,
M., Sidman, R.L., Wolfe, J.H., Kim, S.U. and Snyder, E.Y. (1998) Engraftable human
neural stem cells respond to developmental cues, replace neurons, and express foreign
genes. Nat Biotechnol, 16, 1033-9.
11. Geber, S. and Sampaio, M. (1999) Blastomere development after embryo biopsy: a new
model to predict embryo development and to select for transfer. Hum Reprod, 14, 782-6.
12. Grifo, J., New York University, work presented at the Annual meeting of the American
Society for Reproductive Medicine, October 1998.
13. Hole, N., Graham, G.J., Menzel, U. and Ansell, J.D. (1996) A limited temporal window
for the derivation of multilineage repopulating hematopoietic progenitors during
embryonal stem cell differentiation in vitro. Blood, 88, 1266-76.
14. Hottois, G. (1998) Is cloning the absolute evil. Human Reproduction Update, 4, 787-790.
15. Kato, Y., Tani, T., Sotomaru, Y., Kurokawa, K., Kato, J., Doguchi, H., Yasue, H. and
Tsunoda, Y. (1998) Eight calves cloned from somatic cells of a single adult. Science, 282,
2095-8.
16. Kikyo, N. and Wolffe, A.P. (2000) Reprogramming nuclei: insights from cloning, nuclear
transfer and heterokaryons. J Cell Sci, 113, 11-20.
17. Kipling, D. and Faragher, R.G. (1999) Telomeres. Ageing hard or hardly ageing? [news].
Nature, 398, 191, 193.
18. Klug, M.G., Soonpaa, M.H., Koh, G.Y. and Field, L.J. (1996) Genetically selected
cardiomyocytes from differentiating embronic stem cells form stable intracardiac grafts. J
Clin Invest, 98, 216-24.
19. Jones, D. (1997)
20. Lanza, R.P., Cibelli, J.B. and West, M.D. (1999) Human therapeutic cloning. Nat Med, 5,
975-7.
21. Lanza, R.P., Cibelli, J.B. and West, M.D. (1999) Prospects for the use of nuclear transfer
in human transplantation. Nat Biotechnol, 17, 1171-4.
22. Lewis, I.M., Peura, T.T. and Trounson, A.O. (1998) Large-scale applications of cloning
technologies for agriculture: an industry perspective. Reprod Fertil Dev, 10, 677-81.
23. Li, M., Pevny, L., Lovell-Badge, R. and Smith, A. (1998) Generation of purified neural
precursors from embryonic stem cells by lineage selection. Curr Biol, 8, 971-4.
24. McDonald, J.W., Liu, X.Z., Qu, Y., Liu, S., Mickey, S.K., Turetsky, D., Gottlieb, D.I. and
Choi, D.W. (1999) Transplanted embryonic stem cells survive, differentiate and promote
recovery in injured rat spinal cord. Nat Med, 5, 1410-2.
25. Meng, L., Ely, J.J., Stouffer, R.L. and Wolf, D.P. (1997) Rhesus monkeys produced by
nuclear transfer. Biol Reprod, 57, 454-9. 
- 19 -
26. Pera, M.F., Reubinoff, B. and Trounson, A. (2000) Human embryonic stem cells. J Cell
Sci, 113, 5-10.
27. Prather, R.S., Barnes, F.L., Sims, M.M., Robl, J.M., Eyestone, W.H. and First, N.L.
(1987) Nuclear transplantation in the bovine embryo: assessment of donor nuclei and
recipient oocyte. Biol Reprod, 37, 859-66.
28. Reubinoff BE, Pera, MF, Fong CY, Trounson A and Bongso A. (2000) Embryonic stem
cell lines from human blastocysts: somatic differentiation in vitro. Nature Biotechnology
18, 399-405.
29. Revel R (2000) Ongoing research on mammalian cloning and embryo stem cell
technologies: Bioethics of their potential medical applications. Israel Medical Association
Journal (IMAJ) 2, July 2000 supplement, pp 8-14.
30. Revel, M. (1998) An outright, upfront condemnation of cloning research is premature.
The Scientist, 12, p38 (and see Cahier du Comite Consultatif National d’Ethique, October
1997).
31. Rossant, J. and Nagy, A. (1999) In search of the tabula rasa of human cells [news]. Nat
Biotechnol, 17, 23-4.
32. Schuldiner M, Yanuka O, Itskovich-Eldor J, Melton DA and Benvenisty N. (2000) Effects
of eight growth factors on the differentiation of cells derived from human embryonic stem
cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.USA 97, 11307-12.
33. Shamblott, M.J., Axelman, J., Wang, S., Bugg, E.M., Littlefield, J.W., Donovan, P.J.,
Blumenthal, P.D., Huggins, G.R. and Gearhart, J.D. (1998) Derivation of pluripotent stem
cells from cultured human primordial germ cells [published erratum appears in Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1999 Feb 2;96(3):1162]. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 95, 13726-31.
34. Shiels, P.G., Kind, A.J., Campbell, K.H., Waddington, D., Wilmut, I., Colman, A. and
Schnieke, A.E. (1999) Analysis of telomere lengths in cloned sheep [letter]. Nature, 399,
316-7.
35. Solter, D. and Gearhart, J. (1999) Putting stem cells to work. Science, 283, 1468-70.
36. Thomson, J.A., Itskovitz-Eldor, J., Shapiro, S.S., Waknitz, M.A., Swiergiel, J.J., Marshall,
V.S. and Jones, J.M. (1998) Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blastocysts
[published erratum appears in Science 1998 Dec 4; 282(5395):1827]. Science, 282, 1145-
7.
37. Trounson, A., Lacham-Kaplan, O., Diamente, M. and Gougoulidis, T. (1998)
Reprogramming cattle somatic cells by isolated nuclear injection. Reprod Fertil Dev, 10,
645-50.
38. Tsunoda, Y., Yasui, T., Shioda, Y., Nakamura, K., Uchida, T. and Sugie, T. (1987) Fullterm development of mouse blastomere nuclei transplanted into enucleated two-cell
embryos. J Exp Zool, 242, 147-51.
39. Vogel, G. (1999) Harnessing the power of stem cells [news]. Science, 283, 1432-4.
40. Wakayama, T. and Yanagimachi, R. (1999) Cloning of male mice from adult tail-tip cells
[news]. Nat Genet, 22, 127-8.
41. Wakayama, T. and Yanagimachi, R. (1999) Cloning the laboratory mouse. Semin Cell
Dev Biol, 10, 253-8. 
- 20 -
42. Wakayama, T., Perry, A.C., Zuccotti, M., Johnson, K.R. and Yanagimachi, R. (1998)
Full-term development of mice from enucleated oocytes injected with cumulus cell nuclei.
Nature, 394, 369-74.
43. Wakayama, T., Rodriguez, I., Perry, A.C., Yanagimachi, R. and Mombaerts, P. (1999)
Mice cloned from embryonic stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 96, 14984-9.
44. Ward, K.A. and Brown, B.W. (1998) The production of transgenic domestic livestock:
successes, failures and the need for nuclear transfer. Reprod Fertil Dev, 10, 659-65.
45. Wilmut, I., Schnieke, A.E., McWhir, J., Kind, A.J. and Campbell, K.H. (1997) Viable
offspring derived from fetal and adult mammalian cells [published erratum appears in
Nature 1997 Mar 13;386, 200]. Nature, 385, 810-3.
46. Wolf, D.P., Meng, L., Ouhibi, N. and Zelinski-Wooten, M. (1999) Nuclear transfer in the
rhesus monkey: practical and basic implications. Biol Reprod, 60, 199-204.
47. Zawada, W.M., Cibelli, J.B., Choi, P.K., Clarkson, E.D., Golueke, P.J., Witta, S.E., Bell,
K.P., Kane, J., Ponce de Leon, F.A., Jerry, D.J., Robl, J.M., Freed, C.R. and Stice, S.L.
(1998) Somatic cell cloned transgenic bovine neurons for transplantation in parkinsonian
rats. Nat Med, 4, 569-74.
Internet Web Sites:
http://www.aaas.org/spp/dspp/sfrl/projects/stem
/main.htm
AAAS - Institute for Civil Society, Report
http://bioethics.gov/cgi-bin/bioeth_counter.pl United States of America, National
Bioethics Advisory Commission
http://www.ccne-ethique.org/ France, National Consultative Bioethics
Committee
http://conventions.coe.int/ Council of Europe, Treaty Office
http://www.europa.eu.int/comm/secretariat_gen
eral/sgc/ethics/en/index.htm
European Union, European Group on
Ethics in Science and New Technologies to
the European Commission
http://www.europarl.eu.int European Union, European Parliament
http://www.humgen.umontreal.ca/intro.htm HUMGEN, Research Center in Public Law,
Montreal University, Canada
http://www.nih.gov/sigs/bioethics/ United States of America, National
Institutes of Health, Bioethics Resources
http://www.nuffield.org/bioethics/index.html United Kingdom, Nuffield Council on
Bioethics
http://www.oas.org/ Organization of American States
http://www.oau-oua.org/ Organization of African Unity
http://www.palazzochigi.it/bioetica/ Italy, National Bioethics Committee
http://www.senate.be Belgium, Senate
http://ue.eu.int/df/default.asp?lang=en European Union, Council of the European
Union, Fundamental rights
http://www.unhchr.ch/french/html/intlinst.htm United Nations, High Commissioner for
Human Rights, International Human Rights
Instruments 
ANNEX
Distribution: limited
COMPOSITION OF
THE WORKING GROUP OF THE IBC ON
THE ETHICAL ASPECTS OF EMBRYONIC STEM CELL RESEARCH
Chairperson
ZAREMBA Prof. (Mr) Jacek Stanislaw (Poland)
Professor, Head of Department of Genetics, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology
Rapporteurs
MCCALL SMITH Prof. (Mr) Alexander (United Kingdom)
Professor of Medical Law
Vice-Chairman of the Human Genetics Commission of the United Kingdom
Chairman, Ethics Committee, British Medical Journal
REVEL Prof. (Mr) Michel (Israel)
Professor of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science
Israeli Prize for Medicine (1999)
Chief Scientist, Interpharm
President of the National Committee for Biotechnology
Members
ANDORNO Dr (Mr) Roberto Luis (Argentina)
Professor of Civil Law
FOX Prof. (Mr) Maurice (United States of America)
Lester Wolfe Professor of Molecular Biology
Member of the National Academy of Science
GALJAARD Prof. (Mr) Hans (The Netherlands)
Professor of Human Genetics
Head of the Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Rotterdam
GROS ESPIELL Prof. (Mr) Héctor (Uruguay)
Professor of International Law
Chairperson of the UNESCO Consultative Committee on the Teaching of Human Rights,
 Culture of Peace, Tolerance and Democracy
Former Ambassador of Uruguay in France and to UNESCO
Former Minister of Foreign Affairs of Uruguay
Former President of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
- 2 -
GUESSOUS-IDRISSI Dr (Mrs) Nouzha (Maroc / Morocco)
Professor and Head of Parasitology-Mycology Laboratory,
 Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy of Casablanca
Founding Member of the Moroccan Organization of Human Rights
HAMDAN Dr (Mr) Mohammad (Jordan)
Rector of the Arab Open University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Vice-Chairperson of the Jordanian National Bioethics Committee
Former President of the Hashemite University
Former Minister of Education and Higher Education
IDA Prof. (Mr) Ryuichi (Japan)
Professor of International Law
Rapporteur of the Committee of Regional Economic Development Law
 of the International Law Association
JEAN (Mrs) Michèle (Canada)
Adviser in programme development, Faculty of Higher Education, University of Montreal
Former Special Adviser to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Canada
 to the European Commission
Former Vice-Minister of Health
KIRBY Justice (Mr) Michael (Australia)
Justice of the High Court of Australia
Former President of the Courts of Appeal of New South Wales and Solomon Islands
Former President of the International Commission of Jurists
Former Chairperson of the Ethics Committee, the Human Genome Organization (HUGO)
NOMBELA Prof. (Mr) D. César (Spain)
Professor at the Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Former President of the Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas
Former President of the Federation of European Microbiology Societies
QUESTIAUX (Mrs) Nicole (France)
Honorary Chairperson of Section of the State Council
Vice-President of the National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences
Chairperson of the Permanent European Conference of National Ethics Committees
Former Minister of Social Affairs
ROUCOUNAS Prof. (Mr) Emmanuel (Greece)
Professor of International Law
Chairman, National Commission of Patients’ Rights
Member of the Academy of Athens
Member of the Institute of International Law, Geneva
Former member of the United Nations International Law Commission
TADJUDIN Prof. (Mr) Muhammad Kamil (Indonesia)
Professor of Biology
President of the National Accreditation Board of Higher Education
Former Rector of the University of Indonesia
YANG Prof. (Mr) Huanming (China)
Professor of Genetics
Director of the Human Genome Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Secretary General of the Chinese Human Genome Project